[Amit Varma]: It sometimes seems both amusing and sad how many people behave as if they are the masters
[Amit Varma]: of the universe. I see this both at an individual level and at the level of the species. It
[Amit Varma]: reminds me of when Douglas Adams famously said, quote, Imagine a puddle waking up one
[Amit Varma]: morning and thinking, this is an interesting world I find myself in, an interesting hole
[Amit Varma]: I find myself in, fits me rather neatly, doesn't it? In fact, it fits me staggeringly well,
[Amit Varma]: must have been made to have me in it. This is such a powerful idea that as the sun rises
[Amit Varma]: in the sky and the air heats up, and as gradually the puddle gets smaller and smaller, is still
[Amit Varma]: frantically hanging on to the notion that everything's going to be all right because
[Amit Varma]: this world was meant to have him in it, was built to have him in it. So the moment he
[Amit Varma]: disappears catches him rather by surprise. I think this may be something we need to be
[Amit Varma]: on the watch out for. Stop quote. This is a familiar attitude. We are on the top of
[Amit Varma]: the food chain of mammals. We seem to have conquered the world and we strut around like
[Amit Varma]: perpetually signaling peacocks. But seen from another lens, we could just be useful vehicles
[Amit Varma]: for the true masters of the universe, bacteria colonized by them and used as an end to their
[Amit Varma]: means. And even if we were top dog, humans have existed for a tiny fraction of the time
[Amit Varma]: the universe has been around. And we will surely stop existing one day as the universe
[Amit Varma]: continues freed from distracting social media chatter. But as I point out that human existence
[Amit Varma]: is utterly insignificant and meaningless. I shall also concede that one thing does set
[Amit Varma]: us apart from other species, our level of self awareness. We are the only bot designed
[Amit Varma]: with the capability to edit our own source code and reprogram ourselves. The fact that
[Amit Varma]: we are able to do this is one small step towards controlling our own destiny. And it also ought
[Amit Varma]: to fill us with humility. After all, even if we are a self aware puddle, a puddle is
[Unknown]: what we are and puddles vanish. Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast
[Amit Varma]: on economics, politics and behavioral science. Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma. Welcome
[Amit Varma]: to the scene and the unseen. My subject for today is genetics, and I intend to explore
[Amit Varma]: the science of it, the ethical questions that arise from the ability to reprogram ourselves
[Amit Varma]: and others and the policy implications of all of this. And my guest is a scholar well
[Amit Varma]: placed to comment on all three aspects. Dr. Shambhavi Naik is a biologist who also runs
[Amit Varma]: her own startup and is a fellow at the Takshashila Institution. I've been trying to get her on
[Amit Varma]: my show for a couple of years now, but the stars never aligned. But with the supreme
[Amit Varma]: control of the universe that humans possess, we got the stars to align. And here she is.
[Amit Varma]: Before we begin our conversation, though, let's take a quick commercial break. If you're
[Amit Varma]: listening to the scene in the unseen, it means you like listening to audio and you're thirsty
[Amit Varma]: for knowledge. That being the case, I'd urge you to check out Storytel, the sponsors of
[Amit Varma]: this episode. Storytel is an audio book platform that has a massive range of audio books from
[Amit Varma]: around the world. The international collection is stellar, but so is a local collection.
[Amit Varma]: They have a fantastic range of Marathi and Hindi audio books. What's more, I do a weekly
[Amit Varma]: podcast there called The Book Club with Amit Verma, in which I talk about one book every
[Amit Varma]: week, giving context, giving you a taste of it and so on. Download that app and listen
[Amit Varma]: to my show. And as long as Storytel sponsors this show within this commercial itself, I
[Amit Varma]: will recommend an audio book that I liked on that platform every week. My recommendation
[Amit Varma]: for this week is Men Without Women by Haruki Murakami. I was first introduced to Murakami
[Amit Varma]: through a classic short story of his, The Second Bakery Attack. And while he is better
[Amit Varma]: known for his novels, I love his short stories more. This book is a collection of seven short
[Amit Varma]: stories that I thoroughly enjoyed. So do check it out on Storytel. Men Without Women by Haruki
[Amit Varma]: Murakami. Download the Storytel app or visit Storytel.com. Remember, Storytel with a single
[Amit Varma]: l, Storytel.com. Shambhavi, welcome to the scene in the unseen.
[Guest]: Thanks, Amit. It's great to be here. I feel I've unlocked an achievement.
[Amit Varma]: Oh my God. Just by being on the show.
[Amit Varma]: And also on the soundcheck, when I asked you for the soundcheck before we just started,
[Guest]: you were saying, Hi, I'm Yazad. Kindly explain.
[Amit Varma]: So you know Yazad very well. Yazad was also part of Takshashila.
[Guest]: And he's been on my show a couple of times.
[Guest]: So when we first started doing our daily podcast, Yazad and I were co-hosts, and this was supposed
[Guest]: to be a mic check. Hi, I'm Yazad. Hi, I'm Yazad. And they just caught on. So at Takshashila,
[Amit Varma]: Hi, I'm Yazad is what we say for mic checks. So, Hi, Yazad.
[Amit Varma]: Hi, Yazad. All roads lead to Yazad indeed. Okay, so you know, before we kind of get to
[Amit Varma]: the very serious subject at hand, tell me a bit about yourself. I mean, I don't know
[Amit Varma]: you very well. But in the little time that we've interacted, what has been very clear
[Amit Varma]: to me is that you are like super passionate about science, in the same way that you know,
[Amit Varma]: other people are about books and movies, and they'll discuss the Marvel Universe and all
[Amit Varma]: of that. And you are into science in that way. You're not someone who, you know, happened
[Amit Varma]: to do her education and then just kind of went along with that. Tell me a little bit
[Amit Varma]: about this love for science. And, you know, were you always going to be a serious scientist
[Amit Varma]: like you are? Or you know, how did that all that happen?
[Guest]: No, I mean, currently, I'm fascinated by science. Even though I have now moved away from doing
[Guest]: wet lab research, I now focus more on the policy aspects of science. But still, it's
[Guest]: just, it's what keeps me up at night, you know, a new paper that has come out, or a
[Guest]: new technique that we learn, I love reading about it. When I started out, born into a
[Guest]: middle class Maharashtrian family, I was told I was going to be a doctor, it was predestined.
[Guest]: I think my parents decided that the day I was born, this one is going to be a doctor,
[Guest]: my brother's an engineer, so obviously, and I lost my grandmother when I was eight. She
[Guest]: passed away because of breast cancer, which spread to her lung. So I decided that was
[Guest]: it, I was going to be a doctor, I was going to cure cancer, and I was going to be like
[Guest]: this, win the Nobel Prize, eventually, you know, all of that. I always envisioned myself
[Guest]: walking down the street and this kid comes running to me who says, Oh, you saved my grandmother,
[Guest]: thank you. And that would be redemption. That was the environment I grew up into. Actually
[Guest]: thought I was going to be a doctor till I passed my 12th exam, and this was in Mumbai.
[Guest]: And I did not get enough marks to get into a good medical college. My parents thought
[Guest]: that they could still fund me to go into somewhere which was decent enough. And I made a choice
[Guest]: that I did not want that kind of education. I did not want to be that kind of liability
[Guest]: on anybody. And so I instead went and did my BSc at Ruia College. And going to BSc,
[Guest]: I think was a little risky then, it was not supposed to be the honourable thing to do.
[Guest]: I did not know I was going to do a PhD afterwards. But I really truly enjoyed that experience.
[Guest]: Because that's where I met science for the first time. I wasn't being taught science
[Guest]: anymore, I could explore, I could go to go and sit in a library, and just learn about
[Guest]: genetics and biology. And I was just completely like taken in orbit. And I decided I wanted
[Guest]: to continue in basic science. It was also the first time that I realised that doctors
[Guest]: don't cure diseases, they treat diseases. And as a scientist to figure out how diseases
[Guest]: are caused and can actually come up with the cures for them. I was not saying doctors can't,
[Guest]: but they are so engrossed in their day to day stuff. So that was when I realised that
[Guest]: maybe doing a PhD in cancer biology would allow me that option to come up with diagnostics
[Guest]: or therapeutics or whatever I wanted to do. So that's how I stayed in science. It was
[Guest]: actually completely out of the love for understanding how life has evolved, how life works. And
[Guest]: the DNA is just an elegant, beautiful structure. And the fact that you can encode for everything
[Guest]: under the sun is simply marvellous.
[Amit Varma]: I remember Douglas Adams, who I quoted in my introduction, was once asked why he didn't
[Amit Varma]: believe in God. And he said he didn't believe in God because of natural selection. And he
[Amit Varma]: said that just understanding that theory and what it meant filled him with so much awe
[Amit Varma]: that no divine awe could, you know, compare with something like that. So where did you
[Guest]: go to do your PhD?
[Guest]: I went to the University of Leicester in the UK. So I went to do my master's and that was
[Guest]: I decided, obviously, pre-decided when I was eight, that cancer biology was what it was
[Guest]: going to be. And University of Leicester was one of the few places that offered a master's
[Guest]: in cancer cell and molecular biology. So I went to the UK. I was allowed to stay back
[Guest]: in the lab to do a PhD as well. So the university actually gave me a scholarship. So I finished
[Guest]: my master's, my PhD and a year's worth of postdoc in that same lab. And then I moved
[Guest]: to the National Centre for Biological Sciences here in Bangalore, where I did my postdoc
[Guest]: again, looking at breast cancer. This was all very lucky that I actually got to work
[Guest]: in breast cancer that easily. So I did spend about nine years closely examining the pathways
[Guest]: that cause cancer to be formed.
[Amit Varma]: And two questions really. And when did you get interested in genetics per se, as a sort
[Amit Varma]: of a subset of whatever you were working on? And also, how did you then move away from,
[Amit Varma]: you know, doing science to, you know, into the policy space and being an entrepreneur?
[Guest]: So, genetics has been something that has always, I mean, as I said, and I think this is the
[Guest]: third time I'm using this word, fascinated by. It is just that the small molecule that
[Guest]: can do so much and has survived the test of time for so long. And obviously, it goes wrong
[Guest]: in so many ways in cancer. It is phenomenal. I mean, you spoke about humans being a puddle.
[Guest]: I look at humans as a cancer. We have a lot of characteristics of cancers among us, right?
[Guest]: We divide nonstop. We change the microenvironment around us to suit us, and we end up destroying
[Guest]: everything apart from that. And if we are not careful now, we might actually end up
[Guest]: killing the person, killing the ecosystem that hosts us. That, I think, is something
[Guest]: about that we have a lot of lessons to learn from genetics that we can adapt and use. And
[Guest]: if we are intelligent enough, hopefully, learn from to change our behaviour now. So, I have
[Guest]: always been in love with genetics. It's just that it's micro level of doing things and
[Guest]: things work so well. I mean, things could go wrong and having a baby, right, things
[Guest]: could go wrong at so many levels, but they don't always. And you sometimes get this really
[Guest]: complicated being come out of your bodies. I still don't understand how it works. It's
[Guest]: superb.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and that's one of the remarkable things about it that it's so incredibly complicated
[Amit Varma]: is far more complicated than any process we've designed. And yet we have this bias towards
[Amit Varma]: thinking that everything necessarily needs a designer or needs to be planned or engineered
[Amit Varma]: or whatever. And actually, what is happening in, you know, what has happened in nature,
[Amit Varma]: natural selection is a kind of spontaneous order. All of this design has sort of happened
[Amit Varma]: by itself and is way more complex than anything, any designer, even a divine one. And of course,
[Amit Varma]: she doesn't exist.
[Guest]: I think we're lucky for that. Because I think if a designer had to design what the DNA does,
[Guest]: you might end up with a really complicated, huge, big entity, and not the small, elegant
[Guest]: stuff that we have ended up with. We might have been bulky and huge. But yeah, because
[Amit Varma]: it has come out the way it has.
[Amit Varma]: I've been off my keto diet for a long time. So, I am still bulky and huge. And the second
[Amit Varma]: question. So, you know, you're doing science, it's obviously clearly something you're in
[Amit Varma]: love with. How do you then, you know, move into being a policy person, being an entrepreneur?
[Guest]: So, I was in the UK for nearly six years. And then I was in Bangalore for three years,
[Guest]: working on more or less the same themes. But there were two problems which were very acutely
[Guest]: I became aware of the moment I started working in the lab here. One is that supplies for
[Guest]: any lab experiment that we do takes a huge amount of time to come to India. So, when
[Guest]: I was in the UK, and if I ordered something, it would come in like two or three days, any
[Guest]: glassware, enzyme, whatever I needed. Here, it takes two or three weeks. And that, at
[Guest]: the core of it, is a data asymmetry problem. Labs don't know which suppliers to reach out
[Guest]: to, and suppliers don't know when labs might need something. And that's where CloudCreate,
[Guest]: my startup, was formed. It was to address this data asymmetry and help scientists get
[Guest]: their products on time. It's been about two years now, still addressing the problem, but
[Guest]: we now have a much better understanding of the nodal points that need to be changed.
[Guest]: So hopefully, that will sort some things out. The policy bit is because, again, I found
[Guest]: scientists in India not engaging so much in policymaking. And I felt as a result, our
[Guest]: policymaking is not very attuned to help scientists. Our policymakers are not always using evidence
[Guest]: based policymaking. They don't always seem very keen on talking to scientists and understanding
[Guest]: what issues there might be. And so I thought I could be a bridge between that. And hence,
[Guest]: I started coming to Dakshashila. The point was to understand how I could better engage
[Guest]: with the government. And then once I actually saw how the government processes were, and
[Guest]: there were parts of legislation where I could actually provide a scientist insight too,
[Guest]: I wanted to. So that's how I got into policymaking and gene editing. And the fact that gene editing
[Guest]: is coming up, and we did not have a good enough policy to support it, was how I got engaged
[Guest]: in trying to write up a policy for gene editing itself.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, just assuming that, you know, me and my listeners are kind of laymen, and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, we don't really know the science too much. And I know, it's a very broad question.
[Amit Varma]: But tell me about the state of where genetics is at today. Like, you know, obviously, genetics,
[Amit Varma]: you know, brings out explains very clearly and elegantly fundamental truths about what
[Amit Varma]: the universe is, you know, I earlier quoted Adams talking about natural selection and
[Amit Varma]: genes are obviously the vehicle through which natural selection happens, as you know, Richard
[Amit Varma]: Dawkins wrote his famous book, The Selfish Gene, which popularised that and you know,
[Amit Varma]: when he spoke about the selfish gene, obviously, that was a metaphor. I mean, a gene isn't
[Amit Varma]: actually thinking selfishly. But take me a little bit through the process of how it works,
[Amit Varma]: like how have we been designed if you can kind of speak about in layman's language?
[Amit Varma]: How have we been designed? How do our genetics? Yeah, in the sense that how are we what we
[Amit Varma]: are like, you know, human 30,000 years ago would have been very different. And 500,000
[Amit Varma]: years ago, wherever we came from, I mean, to begin with, we came out of one celled organisms.
[Amit Varma]: And then that one cell organisms basically evolved into everything. And the process is
[Amit Varma]: so beautiful and elegant. And yeah, we did come from soup. And when I you know, catch
[Amit Varma]: a virus, I often go back to soup. But sorry. Take us through some of the elegance of this
[Amit Varma]: process and the role that genes the central role that genes play.
[Guest]: Okay, so there's there's a lot that we can unpackage here, right? Let me give you one
[Guest]: example, which is my favourite example. So we obviously think that humans are different
[Guest]: because our brains work very differently than all other species, right? We are intelligent.
[Guest]: So the reason we have brains with that kind of firepower, there are two underlying reasons
[Guest]: and one is nature, one is nurture. Okay, I don't remember timeliness, I'm sorry. But
[Guest]: many, many years ago, there was one mutation in one of our ancestors, which changed the
[Guest]: location of the jaw, because of which the skull moved a bit, and there was more space
[Guest]: created for the brain. So the brain could actually grow more in our ancestors. And as
[Guest]: a result of that, we actually have more brain space than apes. That was one thing that changed.
[Guest]: The other was we discovered fire. And because we had fire, we could cook food. And because
[Guest]: you're eating cooked food, we could now decrease the amount of energy that was devoted to digestion.
[Guest]: And so more energy could be spent on the brain. At the same time, because we are eating cooked
[Guest]: food, the amount of gut surface that we require for digestion was also reduced. So our gut
[Guest]: size reduced, again, the energy consumption of the gut reduced, and all of that energy
[Guest]: was diverted to the brain. And because of those two things, we actually managed to develop
[Guest]: better brain power than the other species. So I've also like read a theory that it's
[Amit Varma]: also because we see homo sapiens started eating non-veg. And you know, the proteins help them
[Amit Varma]: grow bigger brains to fit the craniums. And one theory is we ate the Neanderthals. So
[Guest]: I don't know how. I don't know if we ate them or not. We all have a bit of Neanderthal
[Guest]: in us. Yeah. Which did not come from eating them. Exactly. Yeah, it is likely. Look, at
[Guest]: that point of time, this is pre-agriculture. So and they were hunter-gatherers. So there
[Guest]: is also this theory that because we came from hunter-gatherers, we were more used to eating
[Guest]: meat proteins than actually carbs. And then when agrarian practices came in, our bodies
[Guest]: are still shifting to eating more wheat and rice. So we see some changes, for example,
[Guest]: in some of the bones in our body that are still trying to fit together into this whole
[Guest]: agrarian lifestyle. And so we are not meant to be eating carbs. Yeah, we just both of
[Amit Varma]: us had masala dosa for lunch at MTR. And but of course, we both agree intellectually that
[Guest]: sugar is poison, however hard it is to sort of. Yeah. And we are basically supposed to
[Guest]: be protein eaters. So that shift has occurred. For our bodies to adjust to that shift is
[Guest]: going to take a long time. They are still adjusting to that idea that we are now eating
[Guest]: this carb, fat-based diet and obviously not doing as much work as the hunter-gatherers
[Guest]: were doing at all, having this sedentary life. And we are still trying to fix up to that.
[Guest]: My idea is that maybe in a few million years ago, there might only be slim humans around
[Guest]: because obesity increases your chances of death. And maybe we will get naturally selected
[Guest]: to be thin. And if I have a time machine, I would like to go into that era and just
[Guest]: be thin and eat whatever I want to still be thin. That would be nice.
[Amit Varma]: I think that is a common lament that both of us can sort of share. So I'll briefly for
[Amit Varma]: my listeners, I'll sort of give a very simplified understanding of what genes do. Tell me if
[Amit Varma]: I make a beginner's error or something. But essentially, what genes do is genes are sort
[Amit Varma]: of our programming. So all our characteristics are written down in genes and often mutations
[Amit Varma]: happen and different characteristics evolve in different ways. Now, for example, let's
[Amit Varma]: say due to an accidental mutation of my gene, I get, say, a bigger nose. And we're talking
[Amit Varma]: prehistoric times, I get a bigger nose. And it so happens that women find bigger noses
[Amit Varma]: much more attractive. And therefore I reproduce more. And because I reproduce more, that particular
[Amit Varma]: gene which gives me a bigger nose has a greater chance of proliferating through the population.
[Amit Varma]: So there are more kids with bigger noses who are having more kids while those with smaller
[Amit Varma]: noses are not mating as much. And therefore, eventually, the gene for small noses goes
[Amit Varma]: out of the gene pool. And this is, of course, extremely simplified because it's not as if
[Amit Varma]: one gene creates one characteristic. It's very complex. It's whatever, but women don't
[Amit Varma]: pick noses as a criteria for reproducing. Yeah, this was just an example. Yeah, I have
[Guest]: no idea what women pick as a criteria. But I mean, this is the correct thing, right?
[Guest]: That your nature basically chooses what, which specimen is best suited to survive in it.
[Guest]: In fact, to reproduce. Yeah, yeah, to reproduce. So, and most likely
[Guest]: driver is food. It's food resources. So if you're a giraffe and you have a longer neck
[Guest]: and you can eat leaves which are at the taller part of the plant than other animals of average
[Guest]: size and obviously have more food and so you will get, you'll reproduce more. So we used
[Guest]: to at some point of time also have giraffes with shorter necks, but those died out in
[Amit Varma]: competition and the longer neck ones. Because one, the longer necks one would have
[Amit Varma]: survived and thus greater chances of having a kid. And two, at the level of the female
[Amit Varma]: giraffes, the ones who would have been attracted towards the longer neck giraffes would also
[Amit Varma]: have mated more with them and therefore their kids were not just the longer necks would
[Amit Varma]: have passed on to the kids, but also the attraction for longer necks because pretty much all our
[Amit Varma]: tendencies and everything is sort of, in a sense, comes from our genes. Like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: just talking about nature and nurture. Steven Pinker once gave a lovely illustration of
[Amit Varma]: this, which I think expresses it very well, because obviously it's a false binary and
[Amit Varma]: there's both nature and nurture in everything we do. And he said, nature gives us knobs,
[Amit Varma]: nurture turns them. So you could have a very big knob for something, like you could be
[Amit Varma]: someone who has a very bad temper and that's in your genes. But if you have the kind of
[Amit Varma]: upbringing where you're not supposed to get angry, then maybe that knob is not turned
[Guest]: so much. That is actually true. So there are these genes, if they're mutated, you can be
[Guest]: extremely aggressive by temperament, but obviously not all aggressive people are criminals. So
[Guest]: there was a study done to try and figure out whether you could have a genetic basis for
[Guest]: criminality and you can have a genetic basis for determining if someone might be more or
[Guest]: less aggressive. But the criminality comes then as an add-on of nurture and the environment
[Amit Varma]: that they've been in and what they've learned. And this also reminds me of a study, and I've
[Amit Varma]: written a column on this as well, on how sociopaths, and now sociopath is a particular biological
[Amit Varma]: term, there's a part, I think the amygdala, there's a part of the brain which is slightly
[Amit Varma]: damaged, so they don't feel empathy. It's a biological characteristic that they don't
[Amit Varma]: feel empathy. And sociopaths are over-represented, like they're 5% of the population overall,
[Amit Varma]: something like that, but they're over-represented in criminals, bankers and politicians, as
[Amit Varma]: far as I recall, which indicates that these skills are, you know, what the genes are.
[Guest]: The lack of empathy might be very useful in getting ahead of...
[Guest]: In banking sales, yes, I think so.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but you know, the thing there is that before we pass judgment, like, are all sociopaths
[Amit Varma]: bad people? No, they are not, because you're born the way you're born. And I always, you
[Amit Varma]: know, try to judge people by their behaviour. If you are born the way you are, there is
[Amit Varma]: nothing you can do about that. And therefore, all of us have baser instincts. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: we should not start loathing ourselves because we have those baser instincts, whatever they
[Amit Varma]: might be towards violence or tribalism or whatever. But we should, once we are aware
[Amit Varma]: of, once we have a certain moral view of the world, just as long as we behave properly,
[Amit Varma]: that's what matters. People should be judged by their behaviour. I'm getting extremely
[Amit Varma]: ahead of myself and ourselves here. Tell me a bit more about the development of the science
[Amit Varma]: and how we kind of reach this modern age.
[Guest]: Let me go back to something that you said about how the awe of the whole idea of genetics
[Guest]: is better than the awe of divinity. And when scientists actually first figured out, so
[Guest]: when Charles Darwin, for example, looked at evolution and natural selection, when James
[Guest]: Watson looked at the structure of the DNA, both the scientists, the first thing that
[Guest]: came into their head was that they were going to be challenging some of the most accepted
[Guest]: religious knowledge back then, because they were basically saying that there is a natural
[Guest]: cause to the way we are, and this is not divine intervention. And both have gone through this
[Guest]: in their notes about the idea that whether the challenge was successful. Charles Darwin
[Guest]: obviously got a lot of hate email, spam email, whatever, from the church for putting forth
[Guest]: the principles of natural selection. But then science relies on facts, not on opinions.
[Guest]: So they could clearly see that there was a way that nature was choosing to act in a way.
[Guest]: So right from Charles Darwin, we had then we had Gregor Mendel, who was a monk and most
[Guest]: of his scientific experiments were done in his parish. So, which was...
[Amit Varma]: And his seminal paper was ignored for like 50 years because it came out in some obscure
[Guest]: things.
[Guest]: Yeah, that's an occupational hazard of being in science. But they did do meticulous work.
[Guest]: Gregor Mendel obviously spent years working on peas. And what he did was basically show
[Guest]: that there was a factor in peas that was controlling the way peas looked. So, the way this happens
[Guest]: is that genes forms proteins, and proteins basically govern the characteristics of your
[Guest]: body. So, physical, mental, to some extent behavioural, proteins play a role in literally
[Guest]: most things that go on in your body. My favourite example is the colour of your skin, because
[Guest]: not only is it dependent on proteins, but also on the way sun reacts and the amount
[Guest]: of time you spend in the sun. And the colour of the skin also provides a nice ethical challenge
[Guest]: for us to talk about.
[Guest]: So, the way it works is that the DNA in the skin cells will form some proteins that will
[Guest]: control the colour of the skin. Similar to that, the colour of your eyes, the strength
[Guest]: of your heart muscle, the length of your gut, everything gets controlled by proteins. So,
[Guest]: what Mendel was observing was the proteins in action. So, he was looking either at the
[Guest]: way the peas were, whether they were smooth, whether they were wrinkled, the colour of
[Guest]: the flowers, etc, etc. And what he found was that the characteristics could be passed from
[Guest]: generation to generation. And so, he said that there must be some factor present inside
[Guest]: the pea plant, which is crossing across generations. And this was the first indication that maybe
[Guest]: God was not playing a hand at creating the pea plant.
[Guest]: After that, his paper, as you said, was buried for a long time, till people again started
[Guest]: looking at the DNA molecule. And this is where it is all started, because the DNA is so small,
[Guest]: we knew that it was made up of only four alphabets, A, T, G, and C. It just did not seem likely
[Guest]: that this would be that elusive code that was governing everything in life. It just
[Guest]: seemed unrealistic. But then, in the early 20th century, a lot of experiments were done
[Guest]: to show that whatever factor it was residing in the nucleus, then people did laborious
[Guest]: experiments, they first killed off all proteins, all RNA, everything else in the cell, and
[Guest]: they showed that it was a DNA that can pass on from bacteria to bacteria, and cause characteristics
[Guest]: to also manifest once passed on. So, it took us about 50 years, and a lot of debate to
[Guest]: figure out that the DNA was actually what was causing characteristics to be formed.
[Guest]: And in the middle of all of that, we had this guy called Lysenko in Russia, who came and
[Guest]: said that genetics is bullshit. There is nothing like genes, there is no genetics, we can give
[Guest]: shock therapy to everything and make it behave the way we want it to. So, he was doing his
[Guest]: experiments on plants. But then he came and said that, okay, why don't we also do it on
[Guest]: humans? Stalin was by then the premier of Russia, and Stalin really bought into this
[Guest]: theory. So, he was like, okay, let us do this. And a lot of geneticists were either killed
[Guest]: in Russia or they fled Russia. A lot of the prisoners of war were then taken and given
[Guest]: shock therapy to believe in Russian propaganda. And obviously, as I mentioned, none of that
[Guest]: went anywhere. But we did have that phase. Germany, on the other hand, Germany, UK, US,
[Guest]: had their own dalliance with genetics. Now I'm going into eugenics, because once they
[Guest]: figured out that there was something like the DNA, which could actually encode for characteristics,
[Guest]: they thought, well, then there must be pure DNA as well, because some characteristics
[Guest]: are better than the others. And this, I think, is the ultimate flaw of genetics. And the
[Guest]: ultimate flaw of the way we look at society today is that we choose what are the good
[Guest]: and bad characteristics. We think we have a moral say on whether longer, bigger noses
[Guest]: are prettier than smaller noses, and whether a very small nose is a freaky one. These are
[Guest]: societal ideas. In nature, everything is okay. Everything is acceptable. So obviously, we
[Guest]: had the entire phase of eugenics, started in the US actually, but then championed by
[Guest]: Germany. And this was again, before we had figured out the structure of the DNA, this
[Guest]: was when we realized that the DNA exists and that the DNA can actually pass characteristics
[Guest]: on. Then in 1953, came the hallmark discovery of the structure of the DNA based on the work
[Guest]: of James Watson, Francis Creek, Morris Wilkins, and obviously, Rosalind Franklin, who gets
[Guest]: zero to minimal credit for it. To be fair, she was also not the most cooperative person
[Guest]: to work on the project with, but it was her X-rays that eventually led to the discovery
[Guest]: of the structure of the DNA. That changed a lot of perceptions in the game of molecular
[Guest]: biology and opened up the field of genetics. Because once we knew the structure, people
[Guest]: could actually go about in trying to then start reading the structure, editing the structure,
[Guest]: amplifying the structure. And so from the 1950s, we have made remarkable discoveries.
[Guest]: One of our chief problems starting out was that there is very less DNA if you think about
[Guest]: it in a cell. So the first thing to do if we wanted to analyze the DNA was to amplify
[Guest]: it. And that's where the most remarkable things came in the terms of polymerase chain reaction,
[Guest]: which is so commonly used now. Any lab you go to will have a PCR machine. We learned
[Guest]: to sequence the DNA so we were able to read it. A lot of these experiments were initially
[Guest]: done in like flies, so the fruit fly that we see. That's a very commonly used model
[Guest]: system in worms, which are so tiny that you need a microscope to see them. But a lot of,
[Guest]: say the proteins in the field I work in, of cell death, of how cells die, were actually
[Guest]: discovered in the worm. And then we found out the human equivalents of those. And all
[Guest]: of these pathways are remarkably well conserved. So you might have an additional protein here
[Guest]: or a slightly little detour of pathway there. But most of those things are pretty same from
[Guest]: worms to flies to mice to humans, which is why you see a lot of the experiments being
[Guest]: done in mice as well. So a lot of the initial work got done in them because the human is
[Guest]: a complex organism to get the DNA out of. So bacteria only have genes in their DNA.
[Guest]: Humans have something known as introns, which are massive stretches of DNA, which code for
[Guest]: nothing or at least we don't understand what they code for. So we have a lot of junk DNA
[Guest]: as well. So it took us a little bit of time to go from the bacteria to actually sequence
[Guest]: the entire human genome. The first human genome was obviously made in 2003 and we spent a
[Guest]: few billion dollars on trying to sequence it. But once we understood the sequence of
[Guest]: the gene, we could start understanding what proteins it makes and therefore what pathways
[Guest]: it governs, what characteristics it governs. And at the same time, we started to also learn
[Guest]: how to edit the genes, but not in humans, in bacteria, because it's a pretty simple
[Guest]: genome and it's usually a single cell. So it's easy for us to also send in material
[Guest]: and in and out of the cell. So we've been doing this whole gene editing, but in bacteria
[Guest]: for a very, very long time. We can also do it in single cells, which are derived from
[Guest]: human beings. But the idea that we could rewrite the code on our own in a very precise manner
[Guest]: only came with CRISPR technology. CRISPR, of course, is a dating app for genes.
[Amit Varma]: Of course it is. So CRISPR was discovered in 1987. So tell
[Amit Varma]: me a little bit more about that. What does CRISPR do and, you know, why is it so revolutionary?
[Guest]: As with most things we do, we have also adopted CRISPR from bacteria. So we have an immune
[Guest]: system, we have antibodies, we have B cells, T cells, which basically kill any foreign
[Guest]: particle that enters into our body. Bacteria are single cells, so they don't really have
[Guest]: the luxury of having this entire complement of immune cells. And the most common adversary
[Guest]: for a bacteria is a virus. So when people were doing these studies, looking at how bacteria
[Guest]: fend off viruses, they found that there were repeats in the bacterial genome, which were
[Guest]: actually repeats of DNA from viruses. So they thought, and it was like an entire library
[Guest]: of different viral sequences that kept on repeating. So what scientists thought was
[Guest]: that maybe these are viruses that this bacteria has already seen. And that is where the concept
[Guest]: of this being an immune system response came in. So what the bacteria actually does is
[Guest]: that when a virus comes in and it chops up the DNA, it takes a bit of the DNA, of the
[Guest]: viral DNA, puts it into its own genome, and keeps it on file. So that the next time this
[Guest]: virus comes in again, they can match it and chop it off immediately. So they can match
[Guest]: the DNA to the existing one inside the bacterial genome, go and chop off the viral genome.
[Guest]: And then they build a library that way of every new virus. And this entire idea that
[Guest]: you can read a genome, and then you can go look for a similar genome, and cut it is the
[Guest]: underlining part of CRISPR. So what we did is that we use those genes that develops this
[Guest]: machinery and put it in humans. We also modulated a bit. So now you can specify this is the
[Guest]: bit of the genome I want to cut, so that the machinery will go and cut there. But then
[Guest]: you can also specify what genome you want to put in its place. And that is what the
[Guest]: machinery does. It is basically like a copy and paste function, where you cut and paste
[Guest]: function, where you specify where you want to cut and what you want to paste.
[Amit Varma]: Let me try to sort of process the whole sort of historical arc that you've described. There's
[Amit Varma]: a theory that the pace of change doesn't, you know, accelerates over time. So for example,
[Amit Varma]: we took 1000s of years to get from the agricultural age to the industrial age, and then a couple
[Amit Varma]: of 100 years from there to get to the information age. And now it's getting faster and faster.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, within the microcosm of what has been happening in this field, it seems
[Amit Varma]: to me a similar thing. I mean, you know, just to think of Mendel, for example, who on his
[Amit Varma]: own without a, you know, a body of a field of work to help him has discovered something
[Amit Varma]: has discovered that there is heritability, but not figured out that genes are a mechanism
[Amit Varma]: for it. Because obviously, he can't it must seem to him that there is a mysterious force
[Amit Varma]: which is doing that, which reminds me of the old saying that a sufficiently advanced technology
[Amit Varma]: is like magic, which is, I'm sure how it would have seemed to Mendel. And and then eventually
[Amit Varma]: 50 years pass, his paper is discovered this work happening on genes. And then of course,
[Amit Varma]: the DNA is, you know, after World War Two, the DNA is finally decoded, and we understand
[Amit Varma]: the structure and it's so beautiful and elegant. And gradually people start figuring that out,
[Amit Varma]: then it seems to me that there are like, two things which happen very fast in sequence.
[Amit Varma]: One is that people begin to figure out what genes cause, you know, what characteristics
[Amit Varma]: and what are the functions and the purposes of genes and the human genome project happens,
[Amit Varma]: which costs I think, $2.7 or $3.7 billion. And today, you can sequence it for $100, which
[Amit Varma]: shows our commonplace it's become. And after that, with CRISPR, and even, you know, technologies
[Amit Varma]: before it, but especially CRISPR onwards, people figure out not only what genes do,
[Amit Varma]: but how you can actually edit genes and change genes. And therefore, and what are the implications
[Amit Varma]: of that, like when we're talking about gene editing, I'm guessing there are two aspects
[Amit Varma]: to it. One aspect is that you do gene editing in an individual. For example, if I have some
[Amit Varma]: kind of deformity, which is caused by a gene, can you edit my genome and make me better
[Amit Varma]: or prevent something happening in future, which I'm inclined towards. And the second,
[Amit Varma]: I guess would be just changing the entire line, you know, editing my genes in such a
[Amit Varma]: way that I'm passing on the edited version to any kids that I might have, and therefore
[Guest]: it passes on. Are these broadly the sort of... Yeah, so there are certain nomenclature issues
[Guest]: that are currently going around in gene editing. One set calls them somatic versus germline
[Guest]: gene editing. Somatic being in any cell of your body that will not contribute into your
[Guest]: child's development. And therefore, any edit done in that cell will remain to you. Versus
[Guest]: germline editing, germlines are those cells, which are those germ cells will basically
[Guest]: contribute to the development of your child. So, any change we make in those will also
[Guest]: go down to your child and any subsequent children that that child has, right. So, they will
[Guest]: impact entire future generation that comes out of you. The way we do somatic gene editing
[Guest]: in itself, there are two ways. One is either you take out cells from your body, you do
[Guest]: the gene editing in a petri dish and you put the cells back in. Or you put in a virus into
[Guest]: a person that takes the machinery for gene editing and transfers it into the cells in
[Guest]: the body and does gene editing. If we do this in vivo, in vivo being inside the body kind
[Guest]: of way, we do not have a guarantee that the germ cells in your body will not be edited,
[Guest]: ok. We can hypothetically say that they should not, but we do not actually have any control.
[Amit Varma]: So, if it was somatic thing in vivo only meant for me, it could also go into the germline?
[Guest]: Could go into your germline, right. We actually have very little proof. We do not, we need
[Guest]: to do more extensive experiments for that. So, the way the WHO says we should call them
[Guest]: is heritable versus unheritable gene editing. And so, somatic gene editing could also fall
[Guest]: into the heritable part. We just do not know yet. We need to do more exhaustive experimentation
[Guest]: to figure that one out. The ethical considerations of heritable versus non-heritable are extremely
[Guest]: diverse. People are usually ok if you want to do something to change your body, you want
[Guest]: to have a tattoo, you want to drink sugar-laced coffee, it is up to you. But if that is going
[Guest]: to also impact your child and their child, then obviously people think that you are tampering
[Guest]: with something that is likely beyond you. So, we are still to, that is a very grey zone
[Guest]: and I am sure we will talk about it in further detail. But yes, at this point of time for
[Guest]: humans there are these two ways, heritable and non-heritable. Also, we have been trying
[Guest]: to do gene editing in plants, but that we have been doing for ages by one means or the
[Guest]: other. We are trying to do gene editing in mosquitoes, in flies, and also some really
[Guest]: weird applications where people are trying to say take the Indian elephant, genetically
[Guest]: modify it so that it can survive cold weathers and put it in Siberia so that the Indian elephant
[Guest]: does not die out. So, the Indian elephant does not die out, they want to send it to
[Guest]: Siberia. Or they are trying to figure out how, why honeybees are dying and how we can
[Guest]: use gene editing to actually prevent honeybees from dying. So, there is this whole concept
[Guest]: of the clean honeybee. So, apparently there are some honeybees which keep their hives
[Guest]: clean, some which are like me and do not. So, the clean honeybees live longer and so
[Guest]: they are trying to figure out what genetic differences there are between the clean and
[Guest]: the unclean honeybees and trying to create more clean honeybees.
[Amit Varma]: And one thing that I think is worth pointing out is that when we talk about gene editing,
[Amit Varma]: we are of course talking about gene editing now with all these tools and, you know, designing
[Amit Varma]: these changes, so to say. But we are actually products of gene editing that right from the
[Amit Varma]: time there was that first one celled organism, there has been continuous gene editing, which
[Amit Varma]: has come down to us most of it completely random with natural selection having its way.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, gene editing has sort of happened by random and through nature and all that.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, there's been a lot of sort of conscious gene editing that has happened
[Amit Varma]: that has resulted, for example, like in dogs, like 15,000 years ago in Central Asia, you
[Amit Varma]: basically you know, these experiments started where there were some wolves which were friendlier
[Amit Varma]: than others. And then they were sort of, you know, bred by humans. And eventually you have
[Amit Varma]: domestic dogs. And similarly, mules are basically an example of, you know, you mate a donkey
[Amit Varma]: with a horse and you get mules. And that's, in a sense, gene editing that you're kind
[Amit Varma]: of carrying out. So, you know, a lot of the mysticism that is there around these terms
[Amit Varma]: as if it's some horrible dystopian science fiction thing happening, gene editing and
[Amit Varma]: all of that. The only thing that has changed is that we understand it better and we are
[Amit Varma]: trying to control it better. And actually, it's like it's been there forever.
[Guest]: Yeah, it has been there forever, except that the driver has changed. The driver in most
[Guest]: cases was nature. And then, obviously, all your surrounding ecosystem got to play a role
[Guest]: in your development. So, the other species also got to have some say in how, what your
[Guest]: population was, what kind of skills you developed, whether you were a burrower or whether you
[Guest]: were going to stay up on a tree, your entire ecosystem fed into that. We have moved from
[Guest]: that to a system where humans can be as selfish as they want to be and pick on things that
[Guest]: we think are necessary for our existence and only help those survive, which is a little
[Guest]: scary, because I'm not sure whether we have a complete understanding of what we need to
[Guest]: survive. But apart from the change in the driver, gene editing has been a part of nature
[Guest]: ever since, before even we came along. I mean, that's how we came along, was through modification
[Guest]: of genes. There is a distrust in the idea, like you said. When I was in the UK, this
[Guest]: was about six or seven years ago. And Europe is extremely well known for its risk awareness
[Guest]: and they really, really take it seriously. And one of the, this was when GMOs were making
[Guest]: a mark on the scene. One of the headlines in the newspaper I used to get at home said,
[Guest]: oh, but GMO tomatoes have DNA in them. And I was like, but all tomatoes have DNA in them.
[Guest]: There is nothing unique about GMOs and I mean, the DNA is slightly modified, that's it. But
[Guest]: so is every other tomato's DNA. Every time you regenerate, you gather a mutation. That's
[Guest]: the way life works. So there's nothing, yeah, there's nothing fancy about gene editing itself.
[Guest]: The only scary part is that now we are the ones who can do it. And so we have to do it
[Guest]: intelligently enough.
[Amit Varma]: Then one of the things, you know, one of the constant stories of humanity, for example,
[Amit Varma]: one of the constant battles within our species is a battle against our own nature. For example,
[Amit Varma]: in some ways we are wired to behave in certain ways. We are wired to crave children, but
[Amit Varma]: people like me fight that by deciding not to have kids or we are wired to be tribalistic.
[Amit Varma]: But many of us are, you know, we have a liberal global outlook and don't think in those terms,
[Amit Varma]: you know, we are wired to want sex more than, you know, some of us actually aim for. And
[Amit Varma]: it seems to me that a lot of human history is sort of mitigating the programming, mitigating
[Amit Varma]: the way we have been programmed, which is basically happenstance. But because we have
[Amit Varma]: also been programmed to think rationally and build a system of values, we then use those
[Amit Varma]: values to fight our own programming. And it seems to me that while we have been doing
[Amit Varma]: that at the level of culture, at the level of nurture, you know, what gene editing and
[Amit Varma]: the new science also does is it allows us to do that at the level of nature with far
[Amit Varma]: more precision than we could have, you know, like we have all striven to improve ourselves
[Amit Varma]: physically, you know, people will exercise, they will work out, they will go to the gym,
[Amit Varma]: they will run, they will build different capacities for themselves in different ways. If they
[Amit Varma]: want to stay awake longer, they'll have coffee, they'll use extremely blunt tools. And now
[Amit Varma]: all that is happening is that our tools are getting finer and finer. And in many ways,
[Guest]: it's almost magical and remarkable.
[Guest]: It is magical. It's also it is scary, because I think first, we do need to check in where
[Guest]: a lot of our values and morals come from. The classic case is about sex preferential
[Guest]: rights, sexual preferences, right? We have been, at least I have been brought up to believe
[Guest]: that being gay or lesbian is not right. It is, I mean, it is not acceptable, it is not
[Guest]: socially correct, right. And a lot of the science that goes beyond understanding sexual
[Guest]: preferences was also for some time tinged with this idea that we are looking for an
[Guest]: abnormality, right, we are looking for the gay gene. And we figured out that, look, genetics
[Guest]: has a role to play in choosing sexual preferences, then nurture also might have a role to play.
[Guest]: But in nature, this is all acceptable. We have taken this social construct of, you have
[Guest]: to be a boy and you have to be a girl. And if you're a boy, you have to like a girl.
[Guest]: And if you're a girl, you have to like a boy and try to impose that on biology. And that
[Guest]: doesn't work, right? We have not, we have taken the social constructs that we have been
[Guest]: brought up with, but we have not been able to embrace our own biology. And there are
[Guest]: those grey areas. And then you say, okay, we can actually genetically edit someone not
[Guest]: to be gay anymore. That is scary. I mean, you don't, you cannot go into those levels,
[Guest]: right? If you want to say that, okay, we'll do gene edit and try to figure out if someone
[Guest]: has got a, and this is a very weird word, disease, because then you and I get to choose
[Guest]: what a disease is. And I can say being gay is a disease, right? But that those are those
[Guest]: areas of science and policy that, that really intrigue me, because finally, science has
[Guest]: to interplay with society in some some format. But we seem to be for millennia now, just
[Amit Varma]: focused on our society and not enough on our science.
[Amit Varma]: The point you're making is really interesting, because, you know, in a sense, it feeds into
[Amit Varma]: my point and elaborates upon that, you know, it's true that we have been wired in certain
[Amit Varma]: ways, many of them undesirable. And because of the culture that we build through our rational
[Amit Varma]: thought, we try to fight that wiring. But at the same time, it is true that those ugly
[Amit Varma]: instincts remain within us. And now that we have the power to shape our nature, before
[Amit Varma]: our culture has completely mitigated all the dark sides of our nature, so to say, and even
[Amit Varma]: that, of course, is subjective, what is dark and what is not, you know, the danger is that
[Amit Varma]: we could actually undo some of the good work and, you know, enhance some of the hard wiring
[Amit Varma]: that we might otherwise disapprove of at a cultural level, for example, the preference
[Amit Varma]: for male children, or the preference for fair skin, for example, you know, and that opens
[Amit Varma]: up a lot of questions about the ethics of it, which we shall get to after a short commercial
[Amit Varma]: break. Like me, are you someone who loves fine art, but can't really afford to have
[Amit Varma]: paintings by the artists you like hanging on your walls? Well, worry no more, head on
[Amit Varma]: over to Indian colors.com. Indian colors is a company that licenses images of the finest
[Amit Varma]: modern art from some of the best artists in India and adapts them into products of everyday
[Amit Varma]: use. These include wearable art, like stoles and dresses for women, and evening shirts
[Amit Varma]: for men, home decor, like wall plates, cushion covers and table linen, and accessories like
[Amit Varma]: tote bags and pencil pouches. This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their
[Amit Varma]: homes at an accessible price and artists get royalties on sales just like authors do. Their
[Amit Varma]: artists include luminaries like Dhruvi Acharya, Jaideep Mehrotra, Madhuri Kathe, Sameer Mondal,
[Amit Varma]: Brinda Miller, Tanmay Samanta, TM Aziz and Manisha Gehra Baswani. They accept bulk orders
[Amit Varma]: for corporate and festival gifting. But even if you want to buy just for yourself or a
[Amit Varma]: friend, head on over to Indian colors.com. That's colors with an OU. And if you want
[Amit Varma]: a 15% discount, apply the code unseen. U n s double e n. That's unseen for 15% off at
[Amit Varma]: Indian colors.com. Welcome back to the scene on the unseen. I'm chatting with Shambhavi
[Amit Varma]: Nayak about genetics and we finish kind of talking about the science of it briefly and
[Amit Varma]: brought you up to the current date. Let's kind of talk about the ethics of it because
[Amit Varma]: you know, as a Spider-Man's daddy, you know, in a previous episode, you know, misquoted
[Amit Varma]: the famous phrase with great power comes great responsibility. You know that it was Spider-Man
[Amit Varma]: and it's not Spider-Man's Peter Parker's dad who actually said that. His uncle. Yeah, with
[Amit Varma]: great power comes great responsibility. And now that we have so much power, which can
[Amit Varma]: have so many kinds of unintended consequences, not just on ourselves. Obviously, now there's
[Amit Varma]: a whole branch of ethics that is dealing just with this. And I'll try to sort of briefly
[Amit Varma]: sum up what the two kinds of schools talk about. And then you can give your perspectives
[Amit Varma]: on them. And one I think is summed up very well by Michael Sandel, who I disagree with
[Amit Varma]: on a lot of things. And Sandel says, quote, to believe that our talents and powers are
[Amit Varma]: wholly our own doing is to misunderstand our place in creation, to confuse our role with
[Amit Varma]: God's. Stop quote. And here, besides the invocation of God, who of course doesn't exist, it also
[Amit Varma]: sort of seems to deny our autonomy and agency. And I'm far more inclined to agree with the
[Amit Varma]: Oxford bioethicist Julian Savulescu, who in the context of in the context of parents gene
[Amit Varma]: editing for the children to give the children a better life, argued that parents have, quote,
[Amit Varma]: a moral obligation to create children with the best chance of the best life. Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And here, what this sort of school of thinking argues for is to say that, look, this is not
[Amit Varma]: some random mystical thing which we use, we do a lot of things to make our lives better
[Amit Varma]: to make our health better, and so on and so forth for our children. Now, if we have a
[Amit Varma]: tool by which we can help our children and fellow human beings and ourselves, why should
[Amit Varma]: we be coercively stopped from using that tool or getting access to that tool? And you know,
[Amit Varma]: again, this whole sort of romanticization of you know, what is natural and what is not
[Amit Varma]: I mean, first of all, gene editing is natural, except it's being done by nature. And Darwin
[Amit Varma]: famously described nature as, quote, clumsy, wasteful, blundering, low and horribly cruel.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote. And if that sounds like some people, you know, it's not it's nature, people are
[Amit Varma]: nice or responding to incentives. So, you know, and I'm also a very powerful argument
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, really strikes a chord with me is Nick Bostrom's argument, where he talks
[Amit Varma]: about the reversal argument that, for example, if you are going to stop me from editing my
[Amit Varma]: kids genes to make him say smarter, then what would you what would you feel if I edited
[Amit Varma]: my kids genes to make him stupider? Because by stopping me, that is effectively what you're
[Amit Varma]: doing. It is the latter, you know, from a consequential point of view. So, and I get
[Amit Varma]: that there are sort of nuances here in terms of most people would say that what I do with
[Amit Varma]: my own body is my business, as you pointed out earlier, whether I get a tattoo or a funky
[Amit Varma]: haircut or go on a keto diet. But if I am doing something which has externalities, like
[Amit Varma]: on future humans, for example, that is a problem. For example, the classic example would be
[Amit Varma]: that I can inject whatever I want in myself. However, where the anti vaccine people have
[Amit Varma]: it very wrong is that their actions, which go against science, have externalities on
[Amit Varma]: a whole lot of people, because if 10 people in a neighbourhood don't get themselves vaccinated,
[Amit Varma]: it exposes the rest of the entire neighbourhood to that. So I've tried to kind of sum up the
[Amit Varma]: different kinds of arguments and you know, what are those sort of how do you see all
[Guest]: this? Ethics of anything is extremely personal, and extremely contextual. And I might be an
[Guest]: extremely unethical person to be saying this, because I myself feel that in a certain situation,
[Guest]: I might take a different ethical stance of it in another situation. And this is the same
[Guest]: person, but you know, if tomorrow, I have to have a child, and if someone comes and
[Guest]: tells me that your child is going to suffer from a very debilitating disease, but there's
[Guest]: a scientifically safe gene editing tool that you can use to now correct the child and make
[Guest]: sure that he's healthy. I don't think I'm going to say no. I really don't. I think it
[Guest]: would be stupid of me to say no. Yeah, it would be wrong of you to say no. Because it's
[Guest]: not just for the baby, but for the baby's future generations are also likely to get
[Guest]: that same kind of defect. And the fact that I would have to undergo, I might need support
[Guest]: in raising this child, the amount of money that I would have otherwise spent on, you
[Guest]: know, taking the child on holidays, maybe, or for schooling or whatever other advantages
[Guest]: that I can give him, it will be spent on trying to fix this kid afterwards. And I really don't
[Guest]: see why I do not get to make that choice. I mean, I think at the end of the day, what
[Guest]: we can enable is for people to be allowed to make the choice. I'm sure there are other
[Guest]: people who think that having kids born with a certain kind of disability is their karma,
[Guest]: just God's way of punishing them for sins. That is their choice. I mean, I would like
[Guest]: them to also embrace gene editing or any medical therapies that can be used to correct and
[Guest]: alleviate the child's pain because I mean, to get better karma, do something else. Don't
[Amit Varma]: put that poor child under stress. Yeah, and I mean, you are dealt the cards you are dealt.
[Amit Varma]: But if you can change them, or if you can at least make sure your kid gets better cards
[Amit Varma]: and he or she otherwise would, why not? And at some level, is it also then a question
[Guest]: of individual liberty versus the so called community good?
[Guest]: Gene editing is so complicated, because there's so many ways you can use it. And I think every
[Guest]: use case has a different framework of what you can scientifically is achievable, what
[Guest]: is ethically acceptable at the societal and individual level, that we actually have to
[Guest]: take a few use cases and maybe talk about it, right. So for example, getting rid of
[Guest]: Down syndrome is a straightforward case. I mean, I don't think a lot of people will come
[Guest]: and say that no, you shouldn't do gene editing. Getting fairer skin though, for your child
[Guest]: is slightly more tricky. Because we don't know what kind of advantages that you're conferring
[Guest]: the child if the child was not fair skin, probably, in terms of social perception, there
[Guest]: might be a difference. But in terms of health, there might not be a perceptible change, right.
[Guest]: But at the same time, would we just have like a society of fair skin children, because we
[Guest]: think that fairer skin is better looking or something like that? I mean, the ethical questions
[Guest]: that that are associated with that are very, very different.
[Amit Varma]: And it's kind of also straightforward, sort of, again, like I said, individual liberty
[Amit Varma]: and a whole more community way of thinking, for example, let's say a parent wants fair
[Amit Varma]: skin. And they might well argue that it's not for other people to judge, well, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the value of fair skin and make those trade offs. I'm the parent, I'll make it in the
[Amit Varma]: same same way that I could teach my kid a math instead of drawing, or I could send my
[Amit Varma]: kid to drawing classes instead of physics classes. And you know, all that is up to me
[Amit Varma]: and they will enhance the kid in different ways, there'll be different characteristics.
[Amit Varma]: So I get to choose why shouldn't I and that's kind of a difficult argument to sort of counter
[Amit Varma]: and especially if, you know, you and I would both be agreed that, you know, that it's not
[Amit Varma]: good for society, definitely, if people display this kind of preferences, because then it
[Amit Varma]: affects, you know, people with darker skins and perspectives just change and it will aggravate
[Guest]: what we see as societal inequalities for some time. If they persist, I think we might just
[Guest]: end up with a completely fair skin society. And that would probably mark the end of humanity.
[Guest]: Because the minute we all become genetically one, that is it, I mean, as a species, we
[Guest]: are dead. So we have to guard against that in a way, but that doesn't actually trample
[Guest]: on on individual liberties. And that is something I think we have not come to grasp yet. The
[Guest]: idea that having fair skin children, or allowing that kind of gene editing is good or not is
[Guest]: something that we have not understood it because there's an economic argument to this as well.
[Guest]: Gene editing currently costs a few billion dollars to do in one person. We are not, a
[Guest]: lot of people in India are not going to be able to afford that. People who can afford
[Guest]: that might actually prefer these kind of luxurious, recreative gene editing therapies. Simply
[Guest]: by allowing them to do those, we might bring down the cost of gene editing total. And then
[Guest]: gene editing for disease alleviation might become cheaper, which will actually impact
[Guest]: a lot of the poor people, vulnerable people who need access to gene therapeutics. So when
[Guest]: we think about the morality of doing some of these actions, we also have to think about
[Guest]: the impact that has on the access of those therapies to people who really need them.
[Amit Varma]: I'll come up with two thoughts here. One is, for example, let's for a moment leave genetics
[Amit Varma]: aside, if you're talking about individual choices, and what role the state should play
[Amit Varma]: in regulating them. Let's take another example from outside science, where if individuals
[Amit Varma]: make rational choices, it ends up with bad social outcomes and talk about what the different
[Amit Varma]: schools of thought would have been. What I have in mind, for example, is I live in Mumbai.
[Amit Varma]: Now, in Mumbai, it is very common, and every once in a while, somebody will do a feature
[Amit Varma]: on how landlords are not giving houses to, say, particular communities, or to single
[Amit Varma]: women, and so on and so forth. Now, at a social level, it's a huge problem, because it leads
[Amit Varma]: to ghettoization. And it doesn't lead to the kind of intermingling you would like to see
[Amit Varma]: though, by and large, Mumbai is a very cosmopolitan city, but you have these sort of enclaves
[Amit Varma]: and and that's not a nice thing. However, at an individual level, it is up to every
[Amit Varma]: individual who they want to give their house to. So if you have a Jan landlord who decides
[Amit Varma]: that I don't want non vegetarian people in my house, although I am non vegetarian, and
[Amit Varma]: I would not get that flat, I respect his right over his own property. Others would argue
[Amit Varma]: that so the argument for state coercion would be that this is a social problem, the state
[Amit Varma]: has to step in and make such discrimination illegal, to which my argument would be that
[Amit Varma]: you don't have state capacity to enforce it. And how do you know why a person is not giving
[Amit Varma]: a house to someone. So the law is completely pointless. But even if it wasn't, and even
[Amit Varma]: if you could enforce it, I would argue that you can't you shouldn't do it. Because state
[Amit Varma]: coercion should be used very sparingly. And certain social problems can only be solved
[Amit Varma]: by society itself. And what you want is over time, you know, the solutions to them have
[Amit Varma]: to lie within the realms of civil society and within the culture itself. To set the
[Amit Varma]: precedent of the state coercing on the basis of imposing some notion of virtue is very
[Amit Varma]: dangerous because today they might do it to support your notion of notion of virtue, but
[Amit Varma]: tomorrow it could be some other notion. So defending individual liberty is a better idea.
[Amit Varma]: And this thought came to me when you were, you know, talking about, for example, that
[Amit Varma]: thorny notion of what do we do if people sort of go for fair skin kids. And and my thought
[Amit Varma]: there again would be that this is a social problem. I'd be very worried if the state
[Amit Varma]: stepped in to decide what can and cannot be selected for.
[Guest]: Exactly. It is a social problem. And my fear is that gene editing might become a way for
[Guest]: the society to kind of say, okay, we have gene editing, we can fix all problems using
[Guest]: that. And instead of going to the root of the problem and trying to figure out why do
[Guest]: people prefer fair skin to begin with, and the fact that it makes no sense, and that
[Guest]: we as a society can change our perception of the way people of the way we feel about
[Guest]: people and the way they look. And that is the crux of the problem. But we might just
[Guest]: not look at it at all and just say, okay, now we have something that can magically change
[Guest]: everybody to fair skin, which would be utter nonsense.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And the other thought that strikes me, and I'd say this question for later, but since
[Amit Varma]: it comes up now is a question of inequality, where, you know, I would say that I do not
[Amit Varma]: foresee that can be a problem. Because when new technologies come up, a lot of people
[Amit Varma]: assume because there's new technologies at the start at the gestation period, especially
[Amit Varma]: are incredibly expensive. They assume that they will cause inequality, only the rich
[Amit Varma]: can afford it. And they'll create a gap between themselves and the poor. But the way I see
[Amit Varma]: it is, if you look at something like smartphones, for example, everybody has smartphones rather
[Amit Varma]: than increase inequalities, they have decreased them, they have equalize the field, they spread
[Amit Varma]: opportunities to everyone. Similarly, I would imagine with over time with over scale as
[Amit Varma]: more and more research happens, you will also like you know, like we like you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: earlier that the human genome project, sequencing cost billions of dollars, and now it's there
[Amit Varma]: for $100. And similarly, whatever technologies come up for gene editing or whatever someday
[Amit Varma]: will be affordable by the common person, which is an incredible thing, because what they
[Amit Varma]: are most likely to be used for most of the time is to solve diseases and illnesses and
[Amit Varma]: so on. And the amount of human misery that will be alleviated, you cannot put a value
[Guest]: to that.
[Guest]: I mean, scientifically speaking, the lowest hanging fruit is disease alleviation, right?
[Guest]: Because a lot of genetic diseases particularly are caused by a single mutation. It is easy
[Guest]: for us to do the cut and paste maneuver for a single thing and everything else in the
[Guest]: body functions normally. The more genes that are involved in thing in a particular characteristic,
[Guest]: the more complicated that cut and paste goes. And so, it is the less the more difficult
[Guest]: it is for us to actually get away with doing CRISPR. Intelligence, for example, there have
[Guest]: been a lot of reports that oh, we are going to have these designer babies and super soldiers
[Guest]: and extremely intelligent beings. We simply do not understand the genetics behind intelligence.
[Guest]: So, the idea that we might actually opt for more intelligent babies is kind of...
[Amit Varma]: And it depends on how you define intelligence. Like, if you define a certain kind of pattern
[Amit Varma]: recognition and so on as intelligence, and you could even select for autism, for example.
[Amit Varma]: So, it depends on, you know, I mean, it is true that a lot of intelligence, however you
[Amit Varma]: define it is encoded in the gene, some scientists estimate, I think up to 60% is kind of the
[Amit Varma]: consensus, but a lot of it is nurture. It's again nature and nurture working together
[Amit Varma]: and one is not sure how to define it or what value to place upon it. I want to ask one
[Amit Varma]: last question about ethics, because I had taken a stand on this many, many years ago
[Amit Varma]: with a very controversial article. So, I'll ask your opinion on that. Before we get to
[Amit Varma]: politics and eugenics, which I think, you know, all of that, the political implications
[Amit Varma]: of it, which you had referred to earlier, and I think we should examine in more detail.
[Amit Varma]: And my question is really about gene doping. And this came up some 12 years ago. And my
[Amit Varma]: sense was that it should not be called gene doping. And that gene doping should in fact
[Amit Varma]: be allowed. Because my whole point was that look, we are taking protein shakes, we are
[Amit Varma]: going to the gym, we are training in high altitudes, we are doing all kinds of things
[Amit Varma]: to optimise our ability for sport. So why not do that? Why not extend that to genetics?
[Amit Varma]: Why do you draw a line there? And my second point was that look, in any case, it is not
[Amit Varma]: that gene doping will spoil a level playing field. On the other hand, sports depends on
[Amit Varma]: the playing field not being leveled. Every single sportsman has a genetic advantage that
[Amit Varma]: allows him to get there. It's obviously a combination of inborn talent and hard work.
[Amit Varma]: But without those inborn advantages, like how much oxygen your lungs can take, or so
[Amit Varma]: on and so forth, you know, all elite sportsmen are basically freaks of nature in a genetic
[Amit Varma]: sense, complete outliers in some way or the other. And what gene doping actually allows
[Amit Varma]: you to do is level the field a little bit. So I don't really see an ethical problem with
[Amit Varma]: it, per se, quite apart from the logistical issues of can you even detect it if it happens.
[Guest]: But what's your take on this?
[Guest]: Yeah, you're right. A lot of, at least the most elite athletes seem to have some kind
[Guest]: of genetic inheritance that they can be proud of. Most recently, we spoke about Michael
[Guest]: Phelps and his ability to process lactic acid faster. And so he tires less because his body
[Guest]: doesn't make that much lactic acid.
[Amit Varma]: Common with many elite cyclists as well.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah. Then there was this family, I think in Norway, which has got a muscle, it's
[Guest]: a family inherited mutation, which causes high muscular strength. So everyone in the
[Amit Varma]: family are really...
[Amit Varma]: I think I was reading about this. There are 29 people in that family who have that thing
[Guest]: and many of them are sportsmen at the highest level.
[Guest]: So it does occur. And obviously, we can really counter the fact, because naturally or not.
[Guest]: And I think you're right. I mean, I don't see why we should stop people from... Actually,
[Guest]: I don't know. I have to think about this. Because if I was born with a mutation, that
[Guest]: allowed me to be better at a sport or have better endurance to actually follow sport,
[Guest]: I might from my childhood be put in an environment where hard work is required. But if I have
[Guest]: access to a mutation that kind of takes away the hard work component from it...
[Guest]: But it can't, right? A mutation can just get you up to the natural level of the other person.
[Guest]: As long as it doesn't take away from the hard work component, I don't see why it's a problem.
[Guest]: If we figure out at some point of time, the magic to do away with hard work, then I think
[Amit Varma]: we might have a problem.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, and the interesting thing is, if you ban gene doping, but you allow gene therapies
[Amit Varma]: in the population, then what you'll have is that everyone in the population can be a Michael
[Amit Varma]: Phelps, but not a swimmer, not a competitive swimmer.
[Guest]: I think eventually sports might be the biggest victim of gene editing. I mean, if you're
[Guest]: not consciously either allow gene doping or ban it and monitor it meticulously, the whole
[Guest]: idea of Olympics and elite sports is probably just going to become redundant.
[Amit Varma]: Because all sports at some level are based on inequality. Some people get the luck of
[Amit Varma]: the draw. They have the privilege of being born with these immense skills. And I actually,
[Amit Varma]: because I love sport, I want that to continue that sense.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, there's there's no ethical reason I can think of for sort of banning
[Amit Varma]: gene editing, even banning gene doping, even if it were possible. And again, it's a function
[Unknown]: of the way the words plays, like calling it gene doping itself is making a value judgment
[Unknown]: on it.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of get to the politics, like the reason genetics gets a bad rap.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason that even today, it's almost politically incorrect in many places to speak
[Amit Varma]: of this or that trait being inherited, especially something like intelligence, for example,
[Amit Varma]: is what it has been used for, what genetics has been used for. And in fact, you spoke
[Amit Varma]: of eugenics. Eugenics was popular in both the US and the English among left wing intellectuals
[Amit Varma]: like George Bernard Shaw and so on, because, you know, they had that transformative vision
[Amit Varma]: of a better society. And then of course, Hitler used it in the way he did. So it's not some
[Amit Varma]: right wing fascist thing, it kind of spread across. And what can kind of seem to happen
[Amit Varma]: there to me is that the political associate the negative association of eugenics, the
[Amit Varma]: way it was used, has cast a bad light upon the field of genetics, which I think is unfair,
[Amit Varma]: because I think people don't often make the distinction between description and prescription.
[Amit Varma]: And today, what has happened is, if you are to say that, for example, A and B are not
[Amit Varma]: the same, that is a description, it is not a prescription that they be treated differently.
[Amit Varma]: And this conflation often happens in the public domain. What's your sense of this?
[Guest]: Interesting. So for my for the Labcoats podcast, I had I had interviewed someone for rare diseases.
[Guest]: And February is rare diseases month. And even that segment, and this is a clinician scientist,
[Guest]: and even that segment ended with him saying about that this is not eugenics, right, that
[Guest]: gene therapies for rare diseases is not eugenics. So there is this fear, not just among civilians,
[Guest]: but even people who are actually very intimate with the field, that are we crossing a boundary
[Guest]: of eugenics? I mean, truth be told, eugenics is the idea that we want better children.
[Guest]: I mean, that that is the basic essence of the idea that you want your child to have
[Guest]: the best resources that they can.
[Amit Varma]: But that's the original meaning of the term, if you accept that language evolves, what
[Amit Varma]: eugenic basically means today in the popular imagination, is you're trying to reshape society
[Guest]: through coercive means.
[Guest]: I think that is basically the point that we need to make is that we all want better societies.
[Guest]: But that doesn't mean we kill off what we deem to be bad eggs. It just means that we
[Guest]: either, we redefine ourselves to be a society which is more homogeneous, and more acceptable.
[Guest]: We do not say that everything has to come in binaries, we do not say that...
[Amit Varma]: More heterogeneous, you mean?
[Guest]: Yeah, sorry, more heterogeneous. Yeah. Not everything has to come in a binary. Men can
[Amit Varma]: like men, if they want to.
[Amit Varma]: And not everybody has to have any kind of value judgment on it. You are like this, therefore
[Guest]: you are bad.
[Guest]: Yeah. So, so that is the first thing we really need to figure out. And then the second thing
[Guest]: is that what genetic editing allows us to do is, if there are diseases that we think
[Guest]: are particularly debilitating to somebody, they can have the option of choosing a healthier
[Guest]: life. So, we are in no way saying that you are bad. It is like taking medicine. I mean,
[Guest]: if you have a fever, obviously you're going to take paracetamol. You're not going to sit
[Guest]: and say, oh, I've got fever. I'm different from my family members because they don't
[Guest]: have fever, I have fever, there's nothing I can do in life. And nobody is, again, attaching
[Guest]: a value judgment to the fact that you have fever.
[Guest]: I have this entire problem with a lot of mental health diseases, for example, is that we put
[Guest]: this stigma on to mental health diseases, which are probably also genetically linked,
[Guest]: in a way which is very different from any physical disease that you see, right. And
[Guest]: because of that, they are stuck in a corner and they're not able to progress. What genetic
[Guest]: editing allows us now to do is just a better understanding of gene functions, a better
[Guest]: understanding of how diseases are caused, and a better ability to accept and treat them.
[Guest]: And we are now at that time in society where we can decide that, okay, we have the ability
[Guest]: to do all of this. Should we do it? Should we decide to make ourselves better in a more
[Guest]: progressive way? Should we be scared of our history, not learn from it and say, either
[Guest]: look at our history, learn from it and go, no, no, we don't want to go down this route
[Guest]: at all, because this might mess up. Or look at it and say, okay, we have made mistakes
[Guest]: in the past. But now there's a new technology that can allow us to do things better. So
[Guest]: should we take that chance?
[Amit Varma]: In fact, in the words of Adam Cohen, who wrote in an editorial in the LA Times a couple of
[Amit Varma]: years back, where he said that eugenics was a war on the weak, but now what is happening
[Amit Varma]: in gene editing can be a war for the weak. So that has, you know, immense connotations
[Amit Varma]: of virtue. And the way I look at it is that the way the difference between eugenics and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the sort of gene editing that you and I support is that the kind of gene editing
[Amit Varma]: that you and I support make the lives of individuals better. They have individual aims. They don't
[Amit Varma]: have communal aims that we must have a pure race or we must reshape society. And that's
[Amit Varma]: yeah, that's the second point that they are voluntary and not coercive. So as long as
[Amit Varma]: they are voluntary, I don't have an issue with it. The moment they become coercive,
[Amit Varma]: it's just flat out wrong and no other detail, frankly, matters to me. So tell me something
[Amit Varma]: in this field of science, particularly, it seems to me that politics is always hovering
[Amit Varma]: in the background, especially because of all the things that has happened, does it get
[Amit Varma]: in the way of the science, for example, just, you know, the question of intelligence has
[Amit Varma]: been so politicized, does it get in the way of what scientists research and what they
[Amit Varma]: say, you know, is a scientist who is choosing between subject A and subject B some in a
[Amit Varma]: university somewhere, going to think that no subject A could be controversial, because my descriptive
[Amit Varma]: words could be misinterpreted as prescriptive, and I could get into a controversy. So let
[Amit Varma]: me do subject B, do things like that happen? Does that affect the science?
[Guest]: Particularly in India, I don't think for gene editing in India per se, I don't think that
[Guest]: has happened. Because
[Amit Varma]: It's not such a big thing here yet.
[Guest]: It is not a big thing. The guidelines have been written by scientists, not by policymakers
[Guest]: or politicians. Our problem is that we have always looked westwards while forming our
[Guest]: own policies. So we have not looked at gene editing as an opportunity at all. We have
[Guest]: not thought about the fact that we are 1.3 billion people with a range of say rare diseases,
[Guest]: other genetic diseases, mosquito-borne diseases, that could provide an opportunity for us to
[Guest]: be world leaders in gene editing therapies. Instead, we are looking westward and saying
[Guest]: that, okay, what is the West doing? Is heritable gene editing acceptable? No, then it's not
[Guest]: acceptable to us as well. I don't think we have figured out why scientists from, say,
[Guest]: the US Academy of Sciences or the UK Academy are saying that, actually only the US, I don't
[Guest]: think UK Academies has said nothing, has commented on heritable gene editing, but the US Academy
[Guest]: and the European Academy has come across and strongly said that germline gene editing is
[Guest]: unethical. And so it is banned in India as well. I don't think we have figured out whether
[Guest]: Indian citizens think that this is unethical or unethical. I don't think we have even bothered
[Amit Varma]: to ask.
[Amit Varma]: We'll come to the policy domain a little bit later. Another question that I think falls
[Amit Varma]: within the realm of the ethical is, and something that you brought up earlier, is a question
[Amit Varma]: of diversity, in that if within a society you have sort of certain, like the preference
[Amit Varma]: of fair skin, and the danger with something like the preference for fair skin is that
[Amit Varma]: it could set off an arms race towards people getting fairer and fairer skin till everyone
[Amit Varma]: is fair skin and that affects diversity. And that's just one example being fair skin, but
[Amit Varma]: there could be other examples of the way people behave and all of that, assuming that at some
[Amit Varma]: point in time, the science reaches a stage which it undoubtedly will, it's only a matter
[Amit Varma]: of time that you can basically select for everything. And sort of when that happens,
[Amit Varma]: there is a danger that we move towards homogeneity. For example, I had done an episode with Vikram
[Amit Varma]: Doctor on Indian food and how most of it is actually not Indian. And one example he gave
[Amit Varma]: there was of the banana, which basically India exported to the world. And we have a whole
[Amit Varma]: huge range of indigenous bananas. But what happened was for all kinds of reasons of economics
[Amit Varma]: and scale and whatever, one particular tasteless kind of banana called the Cavendish banana
[Amit Varma]: became popular everywhere. And now that is being sort of exported back to India, where
[Amit Varma]: it is overwhelming the other indigenous kinds of bananas. So and you know, could something
[Amit Varma]: like this, for example, happen with human beings? Because as a geneticist, diversity
[Guest]: is great, isn't it?
[Guest]: Yeah, it is great. And it's needed for survival of any species. So the idea that we might
[Guest]: have this preference of having a cricket team with all Virat Kohli's is going to be a nightmare,
[Guest]: right? I mean, we can't all be Virat Kohli. We shouldn't all be Virat Kohli. We need the
[Amit Varma]: other players, right? We need a well-behaved Virat Kohli. We would like Hardik Pandey to
[Amit Varma]: come back as soon as possible, preferably.
[Amit Varma]: You are saying this? Okay. No, because Hardik is kind of politically incorrect for people
[Amit Varma]: to say good things about after that sort of kerfuffle he had on the...
[Guest]: Of course. And again, I'm not going to judge him as the person, but he is an all-rounder
[Guest]: and we need an all-rounder in the team. And then it's up to the team to make sure that
[Guest]: the all-rounder is well-behaved.
[Amit Varma]: Cool. We shall do a high five right after this session, because I think he's a very
[Amit Varma]: fine player and underrated player and a much better batsman than he gets credit for, which
[Amit Varma]: distinguishes him from our other great bowling all-rounder, Kapil Dev. What are the sort
[Amit Varma]: of malicious uses of the deliberate malicious uses? I'm not talking about unintended consequences,
[Amit Varma]: which I'll come to and we need to discuss mosquitoes and bats. But what are the sort
[Amit Varma]: of malicious uses? Like right now, we are recording this on Jan 25th. And there's this
[Amit Varma]: corona virus thing that is happening somewhere in China. And you were telling me earlier
[Amit Varma]: while we were having carbs over lunch that there's a possibility that something that
[Amit Varma]: was being, you know, bioweapons might have been created in labs and something has escaped
[Amit Varma]: from there.
[Guest]: That is the effect of carbs. So there is a lab in Wuhan, which is a biosafety containment
[Guest]: lab, where they were researching the SARS virus from 2003. At this point of time, there
[Guest]: is absolutely no link between the viruses that they were studying and the incident that
[Guest]: happened at the Wuhan seafood market. But the use of gene editing to create and engineer
[Guest]: such viruses exists, right. We can use gene editing to take a virus, say even something
[Guest]: as simple as measles, which is common in India, you can take measles virus and turn it to
[Guest]: be vaccine resistant and let it back out, right. Those are things that are really, really
[Guest]: scary that are possible. And virus, the genomes are sometimes publicly available. There's
[Guest]: this field of biology known as synthetic biology, where you create the entire organism out of
[Guest]: scratch. And it was in 2002, that scientists made the first poliovirus out of scratch.
[Guest]: And they put the sequence out in public domain, which basically meant that anybody couldn't
[Guest]: go and see on how to create a poliovirus. And that was subsequently brought down. And
[Guest]: now the public knowledge of some, at least some viruses is banned. So you don't want
[Guest]: to put things like this out in the public domain. But CRISPR has now become so universal.
[Guest]: And it's every lab in the institution I used to work previously has done gene editing in
[Guest]: some form or the other by now. So the knowledge has become so, so universal that it is easier
[Guest]: for people who want to use it maliciously to now use it and create something dangerous.
[Guest]: And it might not take a lot of effort to do that. Whether they have the standards to be
[Guest]: able to protect themselves from that is an entirely different thing. But A, the science
[Guest]: has become universal. And B, there has been an increased attention at bioweapons again,
[Guest]: mainly because the whole idea of genome editing, creating these kind of bioweapons was first
[Guest]: flagged in a US intelligence agency report in 2016. And subsequently, a lot of other
[Guest]: countries have put up notices that this might actually become reality. And I just think
[Guest]: the renewed attention to the topic itself might have made it more appealing to non-state
[Guest]: actors as well. That states now think that this is achievable. So maybe it is.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, that's like earlier people used to be worried about nuclear power. And, you
[Amit Varma]: know, you used to talk about suitcase nukes. But obviously, suitcase nukes are technically
[Amit Varma]: very, very hard to actually manufacture. Two guys sitting in a garage lab somewhere can't
[Amit Varma]: do it. The materials are expensive, uranium, proteinium, whatever. So is what you're saying
[Amit Varma]: that, for example, you know, is it far easier and far less resource incentive to manufacture
[Guest]: a virus, for example, in a lab?
[Guest]: It would be as compared to the other weapons. It depends entirely on the desperation of
[Guest]: the people trying to create that kind of a weapon. And as we have seen in the past decades,
[Guest]: we have become more and more stricter on the other weapon systems, right? And it's far
[Amit Varma]: easier to track nuclear weapons.
[Amit Varma]: This we can't control.
[Amit Varma]: This we can't control. This we really can't track.
[Amit Varma]: Like, hypothetically, if someone was to come to you and offer you some money, which would
[Amit Varma]: make you inclined to do whatever they wanted you to do, and they offered you their resources,
[Amit Varma]: would you be able to engineer a harmful virus?
[Guest]: I'm reading a few papers. And if I have a BCL4 facility, yeah.
[Guest]: You would.
[Guest]: Well, there are only two BCL4 facilities in India, so...
[Amit Varma]: Sure, but like technology, you know, those will eventually, they'll be more common and,
[Guest]: you know...
[Guest]: Now I'm regretting saying yeah. Maybe I shouldn't have said yeah. Okay.
[Amit Varma]: No, I mean, it'll be interesting if someone does approach you, let me know, but kindly
[Amit Varma]: don't accept because...
[Guest]: No, obviously, I have no intention of doing that. But what I think what we're trying to
[Guest]: say is that it is feasible to be done. There are a lot more people now who can do it than
[Guest]: they were 50 years ago, who can actually maybe have put together bits and pieces to create
[Guest]: a sort of crude weapon. The other thing about biological weapons is that unlike a nuclear
[Guest]: weapon, it doesn't have to be precise. It can literally be very crude. And the other
[Guest]: thing I think which we often forget in this entire talk about weapons is that nations
[Guest]: have, I feel, moved on from the traditional geopolitical warfare to more economic warfare.
[Guest]: And in economic warfare, biological weapons are much more useful than a nuclear weapon
[Amit Varma]: is.
[Amit Varma]: Explain that to me.
[Guest]: Look at Wuhan now, right. I'm not saying it's a biological weapons attack, but just the
[Guest]: impact it is going to have on China's economy, the impact it will have on China's morale
[Guest]: because of them losing a lot of the celebrations of their Lunar New Year. The anxiety that
[Guest]: is coming to whether she is a good leader or not, whether he has been able to handle
[Guest]: things well or not, right. And this is in all likelihood a natural outbreak, but just
[Guest]: the amount of suspicion it has brought in, you can realize the amount of impact it's
[Guest]: going to have. And so economic warfare, using something like this to destroy somebody's
[Guest]: food crops, for example, makes more sense than trying to nuke them.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, absolutely. And there's nothing you can do about it. The genie is out of the
[Amit Varma]: bottle in a sense.
[Guest]: And you cannot tell, even with Wuhan, right. The assumption is that it is a natural outbreak.
[Guest]: It is very likely going to be a natural outbreak. I mean, there was this entire thing about
[Guest]: anthrax leaking out from the facility in Russia. But apart from that, we do not seem to have
[Guest]: a lot of virus outbreaks that have happened as a result of virus escaping labs. But yeah,
[Guest]: you cannot tell where it has come from. It is very difficult to trace it back. If it
[Guest]: is a deliberate attack, you cannot even tell which country has done it.
[Amit Varma]: So let's let's since we can't do anything about this, we must be very dark. Yeah, we
[Amit Varma]: must instantly become in denial of the possibility of such a thing and instead turn back to subjects
[Amit Varma]: we can both talk about, which are science and economics, respectively, and talk about
[Amit Varma]: unintended consequences, like one of the famous textbook cases, which everyone talks about,
[Amit Varma]: and I believe has been tried in India is, can you genetically modify mosquitoes so they
[Amit Varma]: don't spread malaria? That is one instance. And another instance, can you genetically
[Amit Varma]: modify mosquitoes so they stop breeding? And therefore, there are no baby mosquitoes. Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Which is your favorite scenario? My favorite scenario is the first because, you know, I
[Amit Varma]: the spoiler has happened. I know what can happen with the second one, which is basically
[Amit Varma]: if mosquitoes die out, what will bats eat and the whole ecosystem goes haywire. And
[Amit Varma]: that is incredibly scary to me. On the other hand, genetically modifying mosquitoes, assuming
[Amit Varma]: the scientists are fairly confident and it becomes a probabilistic game that there won't
[Amit Varma]: be other that they can control for other things going wrong. Sounds like a good idea to me.
[Guest]: What do you think? Tell me enlightened. So I first came across this whole genetically
[Guest]: modified mosquitoes when Oxitec was doing its studies in Brazil. So Oxitec is a British
[Guest]: company, which has pioneered this technology. Their technology is your scenario B, where
[Guest]: you kill off the mosquitoes completely. And they have done this in the Cayman Islands.
[Guest]: They have done this in Brazil, and they have an ongoing experiment in Maharashtra, in Jalna.
[Guest]: It has been going on for I think a year and a half now. But I don't know what the results.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know, don't even know if the results have been made public yet. But how does it
[Amit Varma]: work? They catch one mosquito and modify it and hope that it... No, no, no. So they make
[Guest]: the mosquitoes in the lab, and they make it so that these are only male mosquitoes, so
[Guest]: they won't go out and bite. So only the female mosquitoes will bite you. Yeah, the female
[Guest]: anaphylis mosquito basically spreads. So the female mosquito bites you because poor thing
[Guest]: needs your blood to give birth to baby. Okay, so she's not even selfish. Again, she's trying
[Guest]: to perpetuate because it is natural instinct. So they breed the male mosquitoes in the lab
[Guest]: and the male mosquitoes have a mutation. So such that when they mate with the wild type
[Guest]: being the non-mutated female, the offspring doesn't survive. So the offspring dies. And
[Guest]: that way, you don't get furthering of the population. And the idea is that once the
[Guest]: male mosquitoes die, you replace them every year with newer and newer mutated male mosquitoes.
[Guest]: So that is that model. The other model is in which you mutate the mosquito such that
[Guest]: any larva that comes out, any baby mosquito that comes out cannot harbour the pathogen
[Guest]: itself. So obviously, the mosquito is not causing dengue or malaria, it is the malarial
[Guest]: plasmodium or the dengue virus, which once it goes inside you causes the disease. The
[Guest]: other way is that you change the mosquito so that whenever the malaria plasmodium enters
[Guest]: a mosquito, it dies within the mosquito itself. So even if the mosquito bites you, there is
[Guest]: no plasmodium being transferred, so you're not going to suffer the disease. As you said,
[Guest]: this is a preferred scenario over killing of all mosquitoes because we really cannot
[Guest]: estimate the impacts that will have on the food chain. There are some people who argue
[Guest]: that mosquitoes form only a tiny part of the bat's diet, so it might not actually impact
[Guest]: the bat at all. But it's really difficult to tell. My other argument also is that if
[Guest]: you completely remove, say, the anopheles mosquito, you might see a rise in some of
[Guest]: the other mosquito variants in your area, which might not also be desirable. When it
[Guest]: comes to the other scenario where the mosquito cannot harbour the plasmodium anymore, that
[Guest]: sounds great. But again, we don't know how it will impact other mosquitoes. They did
[Guest]: an experiment again in Brazil, where they took mosquitoes from two or three different
[Guest]: countries and created this mesh mosquito, hybrid mosquito, and released it into confined
[Guest]: field trials. And what they found was that some of the other mosquitoes also ended up
[Guest]: getting pieces of DNA, which were not found in Brazil. So, somehow some gene transfer
[Guest]: has happened. And then this was again a trial which is done by Oxitec. And Oxitec said that
[Guest]: we did estimate that some level of this kind of gene transfer will happen. Now, suppose
[Guest]: the mutation itself gets transferred to other species, what issues might that cause? We
[Guest]: don't know. How effective this whole thing might be in replacing the entire mosquito
[Guest]: population so that your complete malaria incidence goes down, we don't know. The problem with
[Guest]: India is that we don't even know where our malaria incidence is. We first have to figure
[Guest]: out what the hotspots of mosquito bleeding are to be able to then go and do something
[Guest]: there. We need to have adequate monitoring mechanisms to make sure that if anything does
[Guest]: go wrong after we release these mosquitoes, we can figure out in time to stop. The only
[Guest]: difference between a genetically modified plant and a genetically modified mosquito
[Guest]: is that we cannot recall the mosquito. Once it's released, it's released, it's gone. There
[Guest]: is no way we can call it back. At least with plants, we can know which pharma has brought
[Guest]: the seed and we can do something about it. So, I have my own doubts about the technology,
[Guest]: about how effective it would be, how long it will take for nature to fight back and
[Guest]: say that, no, no, no, we understand what you're doing. How long till the larva decides that
[Guest]: we are, sorry, the malaria plasmodium decides to find another host. Whether we have the
[Guest]: monitoring mechanisms to actually take control of the situation. And my biggest doubt is
[Guest]: whether we will again use this as a nice way to say that, okay, we don't need to do fumigation,
[Guest]: we don't need to stay clean, maintain clean household because, hey, we have got any mosquitoes.
[Guest]: So, Sri Lanka, which is a tiny neighbour for us, managed to become malaria free after five
[Guest]: years of intensive effort. Uzbekistan became malaria free after intensive efforts, neither
[Guest]: of them used genetically modified mosquitoes. Whether we have given these other measures
[Guest]: enough time and enough effort to see if they are effective or not, I don't know. And whether
[Guest]: we can actually use those existing methods in a better way than trialling out something
[Guest]: that might risk our ecosystem is something that we have to figure out. I mean, it could
[Guest]: be a great tool if there were no caveats attached to it. But I do not want it to be used as
[Guest]: this great solution. It's a great to buy over everything and say that, okay, we don't need
[Guest]: to do anything now. We just have genetically edited mosquitoes.
[Amit Varma]: So, at the end of the episode, I really liked with Vijay Kelkar and Ajay Shah, who have
[Amit Varma]: written that great book, In Service of the Republic. And one of the, like they were talking
[Amit Varma]: about some of the characteristics of good public policy, and two of them seem to me
[Amit Varma]: applicable in this instance. One of them is that whatever interventions you make, make
[Amit Varma]: them on the smallest scale possible, so that you can control, you can measure, you can
[Amit Varma]: roll back. And the second one is that it should be reversible, so that if something goes wrong,
[Amit Varma]: you can turn track. And it seems to me that in the case of this whole mosquito thing,
[Amit Varma]: one the scale is actually very large, because once they are out in the wild, the consequences
[Amit Varma]: can be across the globe and forever. So, it's not a small scale at all. And two, it's not
[Guest]: reversible. Ideally, a lot of these gene editing experiments at the population level have been
[Guest]: done on islands. I have no idea why they picked Jalna. I mean, Jalna seems like a poor choice
[Guest]: to have. You could have ideally picked an island where you could do this kind of a study
[Amit Varma]: and try to look at the impact on the ecosystem. Yeah. And you know, here, what do you think
[Amit Varma]: of like the common argument used against genetic modification, and especially being used and
[Amit Varma]: I think in that context, it's a bad argument against GMOs is a precautionary principle,
[Amit Varma]: right? Because we don't know what may happen, let's not do it. And my fundamental opposition
[Amit Varma]: to the precautionary principle, of course, is that no progress would ever happen if we
[Amit Varma]: followed the precautionary principle. And in the case of GMO, the politics behind it
[Amit Varma]: absolutely disgusts me because the science is pretty unanimous on, you know, GMOs being
[Amit Varma]: completely safe, and they've saved millions of life. And for, you know, since the 90s,
[Amit Varma]: when they became common across the Western world for millions and millions of hectares,
[Amit Varma]: there have been absolutely no side effects. And the benefits to nutrition and all of that
[Amit Varma]: have been remarkable. I wrote a column on this, which I'll link from the show notes
[Amit Varma]: about the different satyagrahas in India where farmers have fought for their rights against
[Amit Varma]: politically motivated NGOs. But in general, in GMOs, I know we'll both agree on this,
[Amit Varma]: but in general, when the precautionary principle is sort of invoked, what's your sense on that?
[Amit Varma]: Like, where do you draw a line and say that it's applicable here? And where do you say,
[Guest]: okay, it's not? I think for me, it is applicable when it allows
[Guest]: for consent, right? So, for a GMO crop, for example, if I do not subscribe to the idea
[Guest]: that GMOs are healthy, I can say that I don't want to buy this product because it says it's
[Guest]: a GMO product, right? If you tomorrow decide that you're going to release GM mosquitoes
[Guest]: in my environment, I really have no other choice apart from moving. I have no idea how
[Guest]: you'll take my consent into account when releasing mosquitoes. So, for me, everything comes down
[Guest]: to the idea of whether individual consent is enabled in a situation or not. And I think
[Guest]: for GMOs, for the crops, it's the same. Farmers have the right to choose whether they want
[Guest]: to use GM crops or not, and consumers have the right to choose whether they want to eat
[Guest]: GM crops or not. And then you can let the market decide what happens.
[Amit Varma]: That's tremendous clarity, which is a good time to segue into the policy questions. Speaking
[Amit Varma]: to you now and before, you've got a lot of clarity on how and why we should frame policy
[Amit Varma]: and how we should look at these issues, partly because you are both someone trained in the
[Amit Varma]: science and passionate about it, and you're also kind of trained in public policy. But
[Amit Varma]: what's been your experience of working in the policy ecosystem of this in India, which
[Amit Varma]: I assume must be young and growing and learning? And tell me a bit about it.
[Guest]: It actually seems to be old and unlearning. A lot of the policy makers I've met have extremely
[Guest]: rigid views about what should be done. There is this subservience to what comes from outside
[Guest]: India and extremely risk covers, right. We do not look at any incoming technology proactively.
[Guest]: We do not want, we do not take those decisions which might end up, how do I say this, upsetting
[Guest]: certain sections of the society. So, I don't think we leverage the strong points that we
[Guest]: have. A, we have got, well, not a lot, but we've got a bunch of really good scientists.
[Guest]: We have got good infrastructure, and we have got a huge population riddled with problems
[Guest]: that basically provides ample opportunities for you to try and do something about it.
[Guest]: When I was in the UK, when I was doing my PhD on breast cancer, I was working with breast
[Guest]: cancer patients. And in four years, I got to see 16 patients. That's it. And one of
[Guest]: the reasons why I wanted to return to India was I thought that if I wanted to work on
[Guest]: cancer, I need to see patients. And I'm going to get to see those patients in India, right.
[Guest]: But here, we don't seem to appreciate the fact that we have that opportunity to be able
[Guest]: to change so many lives. There's a fear that because there are a lot of vulnerable people,
[Guest]: foreign companies might come in and exploit them. But I mean, that is your role as a policymaker
[Guest]: to be able to protect your people, but also not shield them away from opportunities to
[Guest]: a better life. So yeah, it is. It is surprising because this whole thing about heritable gene
[Guest]: editing and the ethical causes behind it. I've had a number of conversations where I've
[Guest]: asked people, do you think it's unethical? They will say yes, it is unethical. Then I
[Guest]: asked them, why do you think it is unethical? And they say, oh, because the science is not
[Guest]: up to date, it is premature. And then I go, but that's a scientific risk. It's not an
[Guest]: ethical risk. So in their minds themselves, they have not understood the difference between
[Guest]: what is ethically correct and what is scientifically correct. And then when you talk about ethics,
[Guest]: which is very deeply rooted in religion and faith, that you have to make people make the
[Guest]: choice. Again, in the US, there seems to be scientific consensus that germline gene editing
[Guest]: is unethical. But when the Pew Research Group did a civilian study, they found that 87%
[Guest]: people, US civilians, thought that using germline gene editing in babies to correct a debilitating
[Guest]: disease or a life threatening disease is acceptable. So we don't even know where our concepts of
[Guest]: ethics are coming from.
[Amit Varma]: No, and it's interesting and a lot of it may be an instinctive ickiness. Like for example,
[Amit Varma]: when Louise Brown, the first rest of your baby was born, her parents, Leslie and John
[Amit Varma]: got trolled viciously, as you would be in those days before social media with a lot
[Amit Varma]: of hate mail, including parcels containing plastic fetuses, which had been splattered
[Amit Varma]: with blood. And you kind of wondered at what kind of anger causes someone to sort of do
[Amit Varma]: that and where these sort of, it almost seems as if some premium taboo has been breached.
[Guest]: Yeah, it just happens with every new technology, right? When the recombinant DNA first came
[Guest]: in, so recombinant DNA is basically you can change your DNA, you can create a DNA inside
[Guest]: a lab, and any change DNA fault, that's what is known as recombinant DNA. And when we understood
[Guest]: that we could, say, take a human gene and express it in a bacterial cell to create a
[Guest]: human protein, and then we could use that human protein back in humans, people were
[Guest]: scared about what would happen, right? What would people be doing with such kind of technology?
[Guest]: And there was a ban on recombinant DNA for many years. And then there was this entire
[Guest]: episode of when HIV first came into America. And it quickly spread among hemophiliacs.
[Guest]: So hemophilia is obviously this disease that means your blood doesn't clot. So if you have
[Guest]: a tiny cut, you might actually bleed yourself out. It's very common among the European monarchy,
[Guest]: for example. That's something I will come back to later. But so hemophilia, if you're
[Guest]: hemophilia, you require a lot of blood transfusions. And because AIDS had made, HIV had made its
[Guest]: way to the US, and people did not really know where it had come from or how it spread, a
[Guest]: lot of tainted blood actually went into hemophiliacs without the knowledge that it had HIV. And
[Guest]: then it became like a hemophiliac disease. And people really were scared, because as
[Guest]: a hemophiliac, you really had no other choice than undergoing a blood transfusion. But you
[Guest]: do not know whether you'll end up with HIV or not. And that is when recombinant DNA came
[Guest]: to rescue because people had been creating the protein that was missing in hemophilia
[Guest]: using recombinant DNA in labs. This was not tainted blood. This was the pure protein.
[Guest]: It could be given without any worry of spreading HIV. And then the recombinant DNA just burst
[Guest]: on the scene. People were more agreeable to it, more acceptable of the technology. But
[Guest]: it came at the cost of many lives. And I think it might become very similar with gene editing.
[Guest]: Question really is, can we just learn from what happened in the 1980s and 90s? And say
[Guest]: that, okay, we don't want to pay that cost of life anymore.
[Amit Varma]: It strikes me just looking at incentives, the incentive of a bureaucrat who's making
[Amit Varma]: a policy decision about this would be if he is if he doesn't understand this new technology,
[Amit Varma]: like say, in the case of recombinant DNA, and he says that, okay, I don't really understand
[Amit Varma]: this, why should I take a risk? Doing nothing and banning it is the safest way for me because
[Amit Varma]: if I allow it and something goes wrong, and would this and this is a very natural, rational
[Amit Varma]: way for the bureaucrat in question to behave. But would it then point to a structural problem
[Amit Varma]: in the system that there aren't enough scientists or people with scientific knowledge embedded
[Amit Varma]: in the policymaking mechanism, so that such fears don't arise and such decisions can be
[Amit Varma]: taken with much more in much more informed ways?
[Guest]: Yeah, and with transparent data, I think one of the things that we have really struggled
[Guest]: with is getting data and being able to communicate that data in a coherent manner. We saw this
[Guest]: happen with GMOs, we saw it happen with BT Cotton, we saw a lot of narrative being asserted
[Guest]: by anti GMO lobbies simply because the government of India never released data on how good the
[Guest]: crops were. We saw this happen with GM Mustard and GM Brinjal, which passed safety tests
[Guest]: by the government of India, but were never approved by the government of India. They
[Amit Varma]: were approved in Bangladesh.
[Guest]: And they benefited Bangladesh enormously. And our poor farmers suffered.
[Guest]: Yeah, but release the data we need to see, right? I mean, one of the other issues is
[Guest]: that we have been unable to accept limitations. If something doesn't work, it doesn't work.
[Guest]: It's okay to say that it doesn't work and try to figure out an answer. But we simply
[Guest]: won't do that. With BT Cotton, I thought that it should be anticipated that the ballworm
[Guest]: against which BT Cotton provides resistance will develop resistance because hey, nature
[Guest]: finds a way, right? It will happen. We have seen it happen again and again and again,
[Guest]: nothing's going to change now. So, it will happen. And to be able to anticipate that,
[Guest]: to be able to work with farmers so that they don't suffer a loss is something that is completely
[Guest]: undoable. But when technology comes and we either look at it as this miraculous cure
[Guest]: that is going to be a one-stop solution that we never have to look at it again, is hurting
[Guest]: us. Either we look at it from that way, or we look at it from the way that no, no, this
[Guest]: is going to be a complete disaster. So, we shouldn't do it, right?
[Guest]: And particularly for the GMOs, I've heard both the narratives. And they're so extremely
[Guest]: deeming of the other one. They are so extremely, they're just not agreeable to hearing each
[Guest]: other out. They are not agreeing to the fact that both of them have some merits, right?
[Guest]: There are some risks. We are not going to say that everything is great. At the same
[Guest]: time, we cannot say that nothing is worth it. But just getting them to the middle ground
[Amit Varma]: is very difficult. Exactly. And in the case of GMOs, for three
[Amit Varma]: decades, there were absolutely no side effects anywhere. The rest of the world adopted it.
[Guest]: And we were making our... I was at the BRICS academic forum last year,
[Guest]: on a panel on how the BRICS nations can cooperate on agriculture. And someone from the South
[Guest]: African contingent stood up and asked, but GMOs are hazardous to health. So, I don't
[Guest]: want them to come into South Africa. And I was thinking, okay, these people are probably
[Guest]: the best that South Africa can send to academic forum. So, obviously must have an academic
[Guest]: pedigree, must be extremely well educated, has come with scientific people from his community
[Guest]: and yet believes that GMOs are bad for health. So, yeah, there's something wrong with the
[Guest]: narrative shaping that we seem to have lost out on.
[Amit Varma]: So how can this policymaking process in India be reformed? Like, for example, could you
[Amit Varma]: illustrate with the example of any specific policy decision? And what are the different
[Amit Varma]: sort of pulls and pressures that go in? What are the considerations? And, you know...
[Guest]: So, for the gene editing policy, the policy actually just came out in December 2019. The
[Guest]: first meeting was held under pressure in 2017. I was not part of any meetings, I just know
[Guest]: about this from outside. So, in 2017, they held the first meeting. This was the ICMR
[Guest]: and DBT, which is the Indian Council for Medical Research and the Department of Biotechnology.
[Guest]: And then nothing moved for two years until the babies in China were born, the genetically
[Guest]: modified babies, which again put on a lot of international pressure on countries to
[Guest]: pass some sort of policy.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about that, what genetically modified babies in China?
[Guest]: So, this Chinese scientist was working on HIV for a long time. And there is a particular
[Guest]: receptor in the immune cells where the HIV virus binds and goes in. So, if you remove
[Guest]: the receptor, the CCR5 receptor, you basically can afford immunity to HIV. So, he was working
[Guest]: with couples in Africa, where HIV is pretty common. And he decided to find couples where
[Guest]: the father had HIV positive, the mother did not. So, take the egg and the sperm, create
[Guest]: an embryo and modify the embryo such that it removes a part of this receptor. And then
[Guest]: ideally, the child should not get the HIV, which her father has. So, he created this
[Guest]: twins Nana and Lulu. And they were born in November 2018. And he made this landmark announcement.
[Guest]: And the world shook. Because then everyone was saying that no, no, germline genetic is
[Guest]: something we will never get into, we should not get into. There were a lot of sceptics
[Guest]: who said that someone or the others is going to do it. So, we do not see the point of a
[Guest]: moratorium. But there was this supposed self-imposed moratorium.
[Amit Varma]: And then Nana and Lulu come along.
[Guest]: And then these two kids come along. And obviously, then the Chinese Academy of Sciences decided
[Guest]: to take swift action. They put him under house arrest. He is jailed now for three years.
[Guest]: We still do not know what has happened with the kids. They were taken under state control.
[Guest]: But it is China. So, everything is under state control, I guess. And there have been some
[Guest]: studies which some would say that the babies are fine. Some would say that the babies might
[Guest]: not live long. But we really do not know what is happening there.
[Guest]: After that, there was a guy in Russia who said, I want to do the same experiment, but
[Guest]: that the Chinese scientist's science was wrong. So, there were some arguments that the experiment
[Guest]: that he did was scientifically incorrect. I mean, forget the ethics part, but scientifically
[Guest]: could have done better. So, this Russian guy came and said, no, no, I will do the same
[Guest]: experiment, but I will do it scientifically better. But then the Russian government said
[Guest]: no doing. So, that fizzled out.
[Amit Varma]: So, you're coming back to the question of, you know, the Indian policy on that. In 2017,
[Guest]: they met and then this happened in 2018. And how did all of that impact the policy?
[Guest]: So then they came out with an actual draft policy. The draft policy came out in, I think,
[Guest]: August last year, that they announced it and they gave four days for public consultation.
[Guest]: So, it came out on Monday and they said Friday is your last year.
[Amit Varma]: Good Lord, that's ridiculous.
[Guest]: And luckily I saw it. So, I gave back my comments, but I've not heard anything back from them.
[Guest]: And the final draft that was released in December is exactly the same draft as the one for public
[Guest]: consultation. So, I don't know if they've actually, if actually anyone has commented
[Guest]: or if they've actually even looked at the comments or not. So, and one of my bigger
[Guest]: issues about that draft, and I think it summarizes all of our comments so far, is that it says
[Guest]: that gene therapies are going to be allowed for therapeutic benefits. And I have no idea
[Guest]: what therapeutic benefits is.
[Amit Varma]: It can be defined anyway.
[Guest]: It can be anything. And the problem that such ambiguity in policy brings is that, A, India
[Guest]: really requires investment in science, research and development. Our government spends very,
[Guest]: very little on R&D. And no private investor is going to come in when you cannot promise
[Guest]: that the product you're making is going to be acceptable or not at the end of the day.
[Guest]: And when you have something called therapeutic benefits in it, I really cannot tell. It's
[Guest]: then up to whoever is the decision making committee to decide what ambit that falls
[Amit Varma]: into.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, then it's again laid open to bureaucratic discretion, they may, you know, err on the
[Amit Varma]: side of safety and so on and so forth. So, what reforms could be made to it to make them
[Amit Varma]: more receptive to new science and to knowledge and to better data, as you pointed out earlier?
[Amit Varma]: You know, how could it work better? Because I'm imagining the pace of change is so fast
[Amit Varma]: that these are old world bureaucrats in an old world governance system actually designed
[Amit Varma]: in the 19th century by the British. And there is so much change happening so much information
[Amit Varma]: coming in. It's an archaic system in this modern world.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's a copy paste of the old guidelines. So they'll pick some old guidelines and say,
[Guest]: you know, whatever we can copy paste, you can copy paste and wherever gene editing has
[Guest]: to be inserted can be inserted. The gene editing guidelines actually are a little more progressive
[Guest]: than the stem cell guidelines, which came out in 2017 that look at stem cell therapies.
[Guest]: In that, A, the gene editing guidelines actually say that we will form working groups of scientists
[Guest]: and patient groups and lawyers for particular diseases, right. This was something that even
[Guest]: Takashi's working document has argued for the past two years that let's not have one
[Guest]: committee that determines everything for all diseases. So, that was something that we found
[Guest]: was very progressive. The other thing that I think they could have done and what we had
[Guest]: suggested was that have the working group come out with detailed guidelines for the
[Guest]: disease. Since you are the primary funder for a lot of the research anyways, you can
[Guest]: actually have the luxury of saying that these are the 10 diseases I want to prioritize research
[Guest]: on because data shows that they are most common in India. So, you can say that these are the
[Guest]: 10 diseases, we have these 10 working groups who will say that if your solution can offer
[Guest]: say 90 percent efficacy, then we will allow it to the next stage, right. If you have that
[Guest]: kind of clarity built in, then we can actually see people getting more and more into research
[Guest]: and creating gene editing therapeutics instead of just using it for fundamental research.
[Guest]: The other thing that we thought was it is still a very bureaucratic system. So, we already
[Guest]: have a few committees at the institution level. So, say at a research institution, you will
[Guest]: have an Institutional Biosafety Committee, you will have a Stem Cell Committee, and then
[Guest]: you will also have a National Apex Committee who has to see what you are doing. So, a lot
[Guest]: of monitoring going on. This guideline actually forms a third committee on to sit on top of
[Guest]: all of that. So, we are like why have all of these committees, just create one that
[Guest]: says that ok, your research is ok or not ok. Streamline the decision-making, reduce the
[Amit Varma]: lag. Yeah, because now you are just going through like four or five committees to figure
[Guest]: out whether you can actually do what you want to do, after which you start doing what you
[Amit Varma]: want to do. And you kind of mentioned guidelines having things like ok, if you have more than
[Amit Varma]: an X percent chance of happening. And it kind of just struck me that new technologies in
[Amit Varma]: any field, new technologies have a far higher bar of acceptance than existing technologies.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, just to take an example, for example, in the case of technology in cricket, which
[Amit Varma]: I have, which I argued from from the early 2000s onwards, when I was in cricket for that
[Amit Varma]: we should embrace technology in cricket. And my only metric was that is the technology
[Amit Varma]: more reliable than the umpire? Not that it should be perfect, but is it better than what
[Amit Varma]: is existing? And it's not even a binary because technology is an aid to umpire. So, you're
[Amit Varma]: comparing umpire alone against umpire with technology. And say if umpires have a 90%
[Amit Varma]: accuracy rate, I am happy then if umpire plus technology has a 95% accuracy rate. I'm not
[Amit Varma]: going to use the remaining 5%, you know, to argue against technology and to build an alarmist
[Amit Varma]: case. And is that something that often happens in the case of new technologies?
[Guest]: I think it does. I mean, actually, I don't know, because it gets it really gets compared
[Guest]: with what we have existing, right on and how we can improve whatever is existing. Your
[Guest]: first mindset to look at new technology is to look at risks. People rarely look at benefits
[Guest]: first. The most extreme scenario pops in your head first. And then you compare it to the
[Guest]: most extreme scenario of what your existing technology has. And the problem is that with
[Guest]: a new technology, you don't know what the risk is. So, your brain automatically starts
[Guest]: thinking that you're on Battlestar Galactica, right?
[Amit Varma]: Siberian elephants will suddenly come back to India and destroy everything.
[Guest]: Yeah. So, that I think is bigger problem is that we have not been able to make a calibrated
[Guest]: guess of what might actually happen. And for that, you need more scientists in
[Guest]: the decision making process. But we also need more progressive scientists.
[Guest]: We need more young scientists in policy roles. We need more young scientists trained in policy
[Guest]: role. I think one of the other issues that I see with scientists who contribute to policymaking
[Guest]: is that they're not being trained in public policy.
[Amit Varma]: So, they don't know how to frame a problem in policy terms.
[Guest]: Yeah. And they have always been in their nice academic luxury bubble. I might get a lot
[Guest]: of flack for saying that, but it is true. They have not been exposed outside of their
[Guest]: campus to see how technology can integrate with and change society and how society can
[Guest]: actually adopt technology. So, for example, I work with a lot of patient groups, right?
[Guest]: And when I speak to scientists, they're like, ha, gemline gene editing, makes no sense.
[Guest]: We don't need it. I'm yet to come across a patient group representative or a family member
[Guest]: of a patient group who has told me that let's not go down the gene editing because the pain
[Guest]: is very real for them. I mean, you can put everything aside, but for them to see their
[Amit Varma]: loved one out of pain is the most important. I mean, if you have kids with Down syndrome
[Amit Varma]: or you have whatever, any kind of health problem to your near and loved one, you know, why
[Guest]: should you not make your life better?
[Guest]: So just to understand the whole thing of benefit to risk ratio, to take out opportunity cost,
[Guest]: basic concepts of economics, supply and demand is something that scientists are not trained
[Guest]: with. I mean, they're not supposed to be trained with. But if you're going to make a policy
[Guest]: decision, then you really need to know these facts, these concepts.
[Amit Varma]: Fair point. So, you know, before we kind of wind up, a couple of things I'd like you to
[Amit Varma]: talk about. One is haemophilia in Europe, something that you mentioned about how royals
[Amit Varma]: apparently had more of it and royal blood and all bled out faster and did not stop bleeding.
[Amit Varma]: And the other one, and this makes a whole episode non-structured because it's a very
[Amit Varma]: arbitrary thing and I didn't ask it at the right time. But about, for example, the effect
[Amit Varma]: that endogamy had on gene lines. For example, I had done an episode with Tony Joseph on
[Amit Varma]: his wonderful, wonderful book, Early Indians. And he had spoken about how after all the
[Amit Varma]: different waves of migration, first the out of Africa migration, and then the West Asian
[Amit Varma]: migration from Harappa and downwards, and then finally the Aryan migration, there was
[Amit Varma]: a lot of intermingling for a couple of centuries, everyone's having a party, everyone's having
[Amit Varma]: fun with everyone else. And then suddenly that stops. And it's endogamy. 2000 years
[Amit Varma]: ago, and it says David Reich describes it, you know, while the Han Chinese are a large
[Amit Varma]: population, India is actually a collection of many, many small populations, because it's
[Amit Varma]: endogamy. And, and people are, you know, a lot of it determined by the caste system that
[Amit Varma]: there simply isn't that much mixing going around. And I won't ask you to elaborate on
[Amit Varma]: the politics or the sociological aspects of that. But what did it mean in terms of genetics?
[Guest]: So these two questions.
[Guest]: Right. So the first one about Monarchian hemophilia. So Queen Victoria actually had, was a carrier
[Guest]: for the diseased hemophilia gene. Since this is an X linked gene, so women tend not to
[Guest]: suffer from it so much unless both of their X chromosomes are impacted. But men because
[Guest]: they only have the X from the mother will show hemophilia. So Queen Victoria actually
[Guest]: passed it down to her sons and her daughters were carriers. And because back then, you
[Guest]: know, European monarchy tended to marry with each other, you could see that gene pop up
[Guest]: across many families. But I think the most impactful was in the Russian monarchy case.
[Guest]: So Zarina Alexandra was related to Victoria, she was Victoria's granddaughter, and so was
[Guest]: also a carrier for hemophilia. And she was very worried that her son Alexei would also
[Guest]: have hemophilia. He actually did have signs of suffering from hemophilia. And it was a
[Guest]: constant worry over Alexei's future that brought her closer to Rasputin. Because Rasputin came
[Guest]: and said that he could cure Alexei. And all of that muddle obviously contributed to the
[Guest]: Tsar's way of dealing with Russia. I mean, he had other problems as well. But all of
[Guest]: that kind of catalyzed the revolution that saw the Tsar's end, which, I mean, how hemophilia
[Guest]: can ruin families is, is amazing. And the way it actually figures along European lines
[Amit Varma]: is, is fascinating to me. And Rasputin, I guess, was a Baba Ramdev of Russia, and fascinating
[Amit Varma]: description of and this is really unintended consequences where, you know, a genetic mutation
[Amit Varma]: leads to boom communism. Yeah, Lord help us. Yeah. Now tell me about the caste system.
[Guest]: Yeah. So obviously, we have been practicing endogamy for many for more than 2000 years
[Guest]: now. The direct result of this is that if my ancestor from 2000 years ago had a mutation
[Guest]: that caused a disease, it continues to be perpetuated, simply because there is no new
[Guest]: gene pools that are coming in, right. And so you see a lot of these founder mutations
[Guest]: persisting in communities. The most commonly cited one, the most interesting one is in
[Guest]: the Vaishya community of Andhra Pradesh. So they have a mutation in a gene that prevents
[Guest]: them from metabolizing certain kinds of anesthesia. So what doctors are seeing is that if you
[Guest]: give the anesthetic to the patient, the patient dies, doesn't come out of sleep. And then
[Guest]: some back reasons, they figured out that it was in this particular community only that
[Guest]: this was happening. And then they traced it back to the mutation that was common to the
[Guest]: community. So now in Andhra Pradesh, they will ask first, which community belong to
[Guest]: and if you belong to the Vaishya community, they will give you a different kind of anesthetic
[Guest]: so that it doesn't kill you. So India has now embarked on projects to try and figure
[Guest]: out what kind of founder mutations are present. We have, I think, about 5,000 sub-populations,
[Guest]: if you look purely at genetics. To try and figure out what some populations might be
[Guest]: more predisposed to what kind of diseases, so that they're at least self-aware and they
[Guest]: can take proper healthy steps to either prevent the birth of children with diseases or preferably
[Guest]: marry outside their community. But that is actually a very interesting thing. And I think
[Guest]: because I have two cousins who are of eligible marriage age, right? Both are extremely well
[Guest]: educated, one's a doctor, one's a dentist. And obviously, when the family decided that
[Guest]: they should get married, they started looking within the community. And I understand that,
[Guest]: you know, at a day to day level, you'd prefer to marry someone from your community because
[Guest]: you will probably eat a similar kind of food, you're grown up with similar kind of values
[Guest]: and all of that. But then came that entire, so the girls are like, nah, I don't want to
[Guest]: get married within this community. I want to find someone outside. Then came the question
[Guest]: of gothra, right? And elders in my family were like, nah, nah, it makes no sense. You
[Guest]: know, you should marry within the community as long as not in your gothra. Genes doesn't
[Guest]: make any problem. So, I mean, these are both extremely well educated girls, like they're
[Guest]: like, no, no, but you have been doing endogamy for so long. I want healthy children. I want
[Guest]: bigger gene pool. And the elders are like, no, no, you marry outside gothra, you're fine.
[Guest]: The entire system of gothra, however, discounts for the fact that once a woman marries, her
[Guest]: gothra changes, but her genes don't. So, it makes no sense, really. I mean, I can't marry
[Guest]: my aunt's child because we still have the similar amount of DNA shared as I would with
[Guest]: an uncle's child. And so, I think a lot of the genetic diseases that we've seen in families,
[Guest]: in close group families, probably because of the remnant of that is the fact that we
[Guest]: have automatically assigned different gothras to girls. So, marriage is where sexist behaviour
[Guest]: actually also transcended into genetic disabilities. But it is...
[Amit Varma]: This is actually an eye opening TIL for me, and I'm sure for many of my listeners to learn
[Amit Varma]: that so many physical ailments could have their root cause in a social disease, the
[Amit Varma]: social disease of caste. And which is, you know, another illustration of why diversity
[Guest]: is just a bloody good thing. Yeah, but on the other extreme now, we have
[Guest]: seen these things like Genome Pathari, like, where you can match your DNA and find a compatible
[Guest]: DNA partner. We still don't know the science behind a lot of this, right? There are some
[Guest]: extremely encouraging cases such as the Dor Yeshoram, which is a Jewish non-government
[Guest]: organisation based in the US. The Jewish obviously also have been practising endogamy for a long
[Guest]: time, at least certain communities have been. And so, what Dor Yeshoram does is that it
[Guest]: looks at specific diseases that are common to those communities. And it takes DNA samples
[Guest]: from teenagers, it takes no other information, no name, number, nothing. They will give you
[Guest]: a unique ID, they'll take your blood sample, and they will just keep it on file. They don't
[Guest]: even tell you whether you're susceptible to diseases or not. When you choose to marry
[Guest]: somebody else from your community, you dial in both of your numbers, and they will tell
[Guest]: you whether it's a compatible match or not. Right, so whether both of you have similar
[Guest]: diseases or not. That's it. It allows you the right to privacy, they don't take any
[Guest]: public information. It affords you the right to not know because if you know that you might
[Guest]: be susceptible to something, but you're never going to have it, it might just end up taking
[Guest]: steps that you don't need to, right? It might change your lifestyle in a way that you really
[Guest]: don't require. So, that I think is a really good model. But we just don't know enough
[Guest]: information about the Indian genome and predisposition to diseases in India to be able to make compatible
[Guest]: matches yet. So, if someone does come along and asks you for a DNA sample, and they find
[Guest]: you a match, might not buy in immediately. It is probably just as similar as a patrika.
[Amit Varma]: But one day when the science is settled, it'll be a better way to do that than a patrika.
[Amit Varma]: Though ideally, you should go for a date and have a cup of coffee and ask your... Have
[Amit Varma]: carbs. Have no carbs. Okay, so we have come to almost the end of the time that you've
[Amit Varma]: so generously agreed to spend in the studio. Before we go, you know, I'll ask you to look
[Amit Varma]: ahead in the future, you know, you know, the science, you know, the policy environment,
[Amit Varma]: you know, what's going on, look 20 years ahead, okay, 20 years ahead, and tell me what is
[Amit Varma]: the best case scenario for humans and what is the worst case scenario with regard to
[Amit Varma]: where genetic technologies, our knowledge of genetics is taking us because my sense
[Amit Varma]: is and I think you'll agree with me is that this will be enormously consequential and
[Amit Varma]: will have huge impact on human welfare. So give me a best case scenario and a worst case.
[Guest]: My worst case scenario, which I'm tending to think is also the likely scenario, is that
[Guest]: we selfishly use gene editing to change the nature around us for it to fit with us rather
[Guest]: than for us to fit with nature. We have picked a handful of species that we want to survive,
[Guest]: and we basically are going to end up destroying Earth doing that. Best case scenario is that
[Guest]: we keep the tools ready for when we need to use them. And we can intelligently figure
[Guest]: out what are the cases in which we really, really need to use this technology and cases
[Guest]: where our existing technology or a change of our own convenience is enough to guarantee
[Guest]: a better future. If we can figure out that gene editing is not going to be the one all
[Guest]: solution that we are ready to give up some comforts to say real and climate change. And
[Guest]: we opt to do that for our future generations. Then I see in 20 years, we are in a really
[Guest]: good place on Earth, where we can leave to future generations with the hope that they
[Guest]: can continue surviving.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for coming on the show, Shambhavi.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for having me.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the show, do head on over to Twitter and follow Shambhavi at
[Amit Varma]: The Naik Mike. I'll have to spell that out as one word. T H E N A I K M I C. The Naik
[Amit Varma]: Mike, one word on Twitter, Shambhavi. You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A
[Amit Varma]: M I T V A R M A. You can browse past episodes of The Scene and The Unseen at sceneunseen.in
[Amit Varma]: and thinkpragati.com. The Scene and The Unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution,
[Amit Varma]: where Shambhavi and along with many other outstanding policy thinkers work. You can
[Amit Varma]: check out their public policy courses at takshashila.org.in. Thank you for listening.